<html><body><pre>
[Title 41 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - July 1, 1997 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]


[[Page i]]

          41


<R02>
          Public Contracts and Property Management

<R03>


          CHAPTER 201 TO END

          Revised as of July 1, 1997
          CONTAINING
          A CODIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS
          OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY
          AND FUTURE EFFECT
          AS OF JULY 1, 1997

          With Ancillaries
          Published by
          the Office of the Federal Register
          National Archives and Records
          Administration
          as a Special Edition of
          the Federal Register



[[Page ii]]

                                      




                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 1997



               For sale by U.S. Government Printing Office
 Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328



[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 41:
      Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
 
Regulations System

          Chapter 201--[Reserved]                                    5
      Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
          Chapter 301--Travel Allowances                             9
          Chapter 302--Relocation Allowances                       111
          Chapter 303--Payment of Expenses Connected With The 
          Death Of Certain Employees                               231
          Chapter 304--Payment From A Non-Federal Source For 
          Travel Expenses                                          237
  Finding Aids:
    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters..........................     247
    Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR........     263
    List of CFR Sections Affected.............................     273

[[Page iv]]



      



                                                                                                                
                                  ----------------------------------------------------------                    

   Cite this Code:  CFR                                                         
                                                                                                                
   To cite the regulations in this volume use title, part                       
   and section number. Thus, 41 CFR 301-1.1 refers to                          
   title 41, part 301-1, section 1.                                            
                                 ----------------------------------------------------------                    
                                                                                                                


[[Page v]]

                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1
    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, July 1, 1997), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 1986, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, or 1973-1985, published in seven separate volumes. For 
the period beginning January 1, 1986, a ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I), and Acts Requiring Publication 
in the Federal Register (Table II). A list of CFR titles, chapters, and 
parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-523-5227 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408.
SALES
    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call 202-512-1800, 
M-F 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or fax your order to 202-512-2233, 24 hours 
a day. For payment by check, write to the Superintendent of Documents, 
Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO 
Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

                              Raymond A. Mosley,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

July 1, 1997.



[[Page vii]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management consists of 
Subtitle A--Federal Procurement Regulations System [Note]; Subtitle B--
Other Provisions Relating to Public Contracts; Subtitle C--Federal 
Property Management Regulations System; Subtitle D is reserved for other 
provisions relating to property management, Subtitle E--Federal 
Information Resources Management Regulations System and Subtitle F--
Federal Travel Regulation System.

    As of July 1, 1985, the text of subtitle A is no longer published in 
the Code of Federal Regulations. For an explanation of the status of 
subtitle A, see 41 CFR chapters 1--100 (page 2).

    Other government-wide procurement regulations relating to public 
contracts appear in chapters 50 through 100, subtitle B.

    The Federal property management regulations in chapter 101 of 
subtitle C are government-wide property management regulations issued by 
the General Services Administration. In the remaining chapters of 
subtitle C are the implementing and supplementing property management 
regulations issued by individual Government agencies. Those regulations 
which implement chapter 101 are numerically keyed to it.

    The Federal Travel Regulation System in chapters 301--304 of 
subtitle F are issued by the General Services Administration.

    Title 41 is composed of four volumes. The chapters in these volumes 
are arranged as follows: Chapters 1--100, chapter 101, chapters 102--
200, and chapter 201 to End. These volumes represent all current 
regulations codified under this title of the CFR as of July 1, 1997.

    Redesignation tables appear in the finding aids section of the 
volumes containing chapter 101 and chapters 102 to 200.

    For this volume, Brian Swidal was Chief Editor. The Code of Federal 
Regulations publication program is under the direction of Frances D. 
McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[Page viii]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>

 

[[Page 1]]


<R01>
           TITLE 41--PUBLIC CONTRACTS AND PROPERTY MANAGEMENT


<R02>

                 (This book contains chapter 201 to End)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part
SUBTITLE E--Federal Information Resources Management Regulations System:

Chapter 201--[Reserved].....................................

SUBTITLE F--Federal Travel Regulation System

chapter 301--Travel Allowances..............................       301-1
chapter 302--Relocation Allowances..........................       302-1
chapter 303--Payment of Expenses Connected With The Death Of 
  Certain Employees.........................................       303-1
chapter 304--Payment From A Non-Federal Source For Travel 
  Expenses..................................................       304-1

[[Page 3]]

 Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management Regulations System

[[Page 5]]


<R02>
                         CHAPTER 201--[RESERVED]


<R03>

[[Page 7]]

              Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System

[[Page 9]]


<R02>
                     CHAPTER 301--TRAVEL ALLOWANCES


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

Part                                                                Page
301-1           Applicability and general rules.............          10
301-2           Transportation allowable....................          18
301-3           Use of commercial transportation............          22
301-4           Reimbursement for use of privately owned 
                    conveyances.............................          35
301-5           Baggage.....................................          39
301-6           Communications services.....................          40
301-7           Per diem allowances.........................          41
301-8           Reimbursement of actual subsistence expenses          53
301-9           Miscellaneous expenses......................          57
301-10          Sources of funds............................          59
301-11          Claims for reimbursement....................          64
301-12          Emergency travel of employee due to illness 
                    or injury or a personal emergency 
                    situation, within or outside CONUS......          68
301-13    [Reserved]
301-14          Payment of subsistence and transportation 
                    expenses for threatened law enforcement/
                    investigative employees.................          71
301-15          Travel management programs..................          74
301-16          Conference Planning.........................          86
301-17          Agency travel data requirements.............          89

                Appendix A to Chapter 301--Prescribed 
                    Maximum Per Diem Rates for CONUS........          89
                Appendix B to Chapter 301--Allocation of 
                    M&IE Rates to Be Used in Making 
                    Deductions From the M&IE Allowance......         108

[[Page 10]]


<R03>
PART 301-1--APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES--Table of Contents

<R05>


         Subpart A--Authority, Applicability, and General Rules

Sec.
301-1.1  Authority.
301-1.2  Applicability.
301-1.3  General rules.

             Subpart B--Official Government Business Travel

301-1.100  Applicability.
301-1.101  Authorization of travel.
301-1.102  Guidelines for issuing travel authorizations.
301-1.103  Instructions/guidelines for travelers.

               Subpart C--Pre-Employment Interview Travel

301-1.200  Applicability.
301-1.201  Authorization of travel.
301-1.202  Responsibilities for pre-employment interview travel.
301-1.203  Allowable reimbursements.
301-1.204  Sources of funds.
301-1.205  Claims for reimbursement.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5707; 31 U.S.C. 1353; and 40 U.S.C. 486(c).


<R04>
         Subpart A--Authority, Applicability, and General Rules


<R05>
Sec. 301-1.1  Authority.

    This chapter is issued under the authority of 5 U.S.C. 5701-5709, 31 
U.S.C. 1353, and 40 U.S.C. 486(c).

[FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23654, May 23, 1991, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 
FR 28633, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-1.2  Applicability.

    (a) This chapter applies to official travel of civilian employees of 
Government agencies, including civilian employees of the Department of 
Defense, as authorized under 5 U.S.C. 5701-5709, but excluding employees 
of the judicial branch of the Government.
    (b) This chapter also applies to official travel of individuals 
employed intermittently in the Government service as consultants or 
experts and paid on a daily when-actually-employed (WAE) basis and of 
individuals serving without pay or at $1 a year. These individuals are 
not considered to have a ``permanent duty station'' within the general 
meaning of that term; however, they may be allowed travel or 
transportation expenses under this chapter while traveling on official 
business for the Government away from their homes or regular places of 
business and while at places of Government employment or service. 
Maximum rates prescribed in this chapter are applicable except as 
provided in paragraph (c) of this section or unless a higher rate is 
specifically authorized in an appropriation or other statute.
    (c) To the extent the Government has received payment, as defined in 
Sec. 304-1.2(c) of this subtitle, and except as provided in Sec. 304-1.7 
of this subtitle, acceptance of such payment for, and reimbursement by 
an agency to, an employee (and/or the accompanying spouse of such 
employee when applicable) under part 304-1 of this subtitle are not 
subject to the maximum rates or transportation class of service 
limitations prescribed in this chapter for reimbursable travel expenses.
    (d) This chapter also applies to travel by individuals being 
considered for employment to and from pre-employment interviews 
determined necessary by an agency.

[54 FR 20267, May 10, 1989, as amended at 56 FR 9878, Mar. 8, 1991; 56 
FR 11304, Mar. 15, 1991. Redesignated and amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 
23654, May 23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, June 26, 1992; 57 FR 
53289, Nov. 9, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-1.3  General rules.

    (a) Employee's obligation--(1) Prudent person rule. An employee 
traveling on official business is expected to exercise the same care in 
incurring expenses that a prudent person would exercise if traveling on 
personal business. Excess costs, circuitous routes, delays, or luxury 
accommodations and services unnecessary or unjustified in the 
performance of official business are not acceptable under this standard. 
Employees will be responsible for excess costs and any additional 
expenses incurred for personal preference or convenience.
    (2) Approved (firesafe) accommodation. It is the policy of the 
Government, as reflected in the Hotel and Motel Fire Safety Act of 1990 
(Pub. L. 101-391,

[[Page 11]]

Sept. 25, 1990), referred to as ``the Act'' in this paragraph, to save 
lives and protect property by promoting fire safety in hotels, motels, 
and all places of public accommodation affecting commerce. In 
furtherance of the Act's goals, employees are strongly encouraged to 
stay in an approved accommodation when commercial lodging is required. 
Such action will serve to benefit all travelers by influencing the 
management of places of public accommodation affecting commerce to 
comply with the Act's fire safety requirements and maintain approved 
accommodation status. An approved accommodation provides certain fire 
detection and safety devices that reduce the likelihood of injury to, 
and protect the lives of, travelers.
    (b) Reimbursable expenses. Travel expenses which will be reimbursed 
are confined to those expenses essential to the transaction of official 
business.
    (c) Definitions--(1) Agency. Except as otherwise provided in 
Sec. 301-17.2(a) of this chapter, ``agency'' for purposes of this 
chapter means an executive agency as defined in 5 U.S.C. 105; a military 
department; an office, agency, or other establishment in the legislative 
branch; and the government of the District of Columbia; but does not 
include a Government-controlled corporation, a Member of Congress, or an 
office or committee of either House of Congress or of the two Houses.
    (2) Employee. As used in this chapter, ``employee'' means the head 
of an agency, an agency official, or any other individual employed by an 
agency. This definition also includes an individual employed 
intermittently in Government service as an expert or consultant and paid 
on a daily when-actually-employed (WAE) basis and an individual serving 
without pay or at $1 a year (5 U.S.C. 5701(2)).
    (3) Interviewee. As used in this chapter, ``interviewee'' means an 
individual who is being considered for employment by an agency.
    (4) Official station and post of duty. Designated post of duty and 
official station have the same meaning. The limits of the official 
station will be the corporate limits of the city or town in which the 
officer or employee is stationed. If the employee is not stationed in an 
incorporated city or town, the official station is the reservation, 
station, or established area, or, in the case of large reservations, the 
established subdivision thereof, having definite boundaries within which 
the designated post of duty is located.
    (5) Government. ``Government'' means the Government of the United 
States and the government of the District of Columbia.
    (6) Continental United States. 1``Continental United States'' means 
the 48 contiguous States and the District of Columbia. The term may be 
abbreviated as CONUS.
    (7) United States. When used in a geographical sense, ``United 
States'' means the 50 States and the District of Columbia except as 
provided in Sec. 301-3.6(b)(1)(iii). The terms United States and the 50 
States and the District of Columbia may be used interchangeably.
    (8) Government-furnished automobile. The term ``Government-furnished 
automobile'' includes an automobile which is (i) owned by an agency, 
(ii) assigned or dispatched to an agency on a rental basis from a GSA 
Interagency Fleet Management Center, or (iii) leased by the Government 
for a period of 30 days or longer from a commercial firm.
    (9) Government-contract rental automobile. A ``Government-contract 
rental automobile'' is an automobile obtained for short-term use from a 
commercial firm under the provisions of an appropriate General Services 
Administration (GSA) Federal Supply Schedule contract.
    (10) Special conveyance. ``Special conveyance'' is any method of 
transportation other than common carrier, Government-furnished, 
Government-contract rental, or privately owned, which requires specific 
authorization or approval for the use thereof. Such transportation 
generally includes conveyances obtained through commercial rental means 
for less than 30 calendar days.

[54 FR 20267, May 10, 1989, as amended at 56 FR 9878, Mar. 8, 1991. 
Redesignated and amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23654, May 23, 1991; FTR 
Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 39, 59 FR 46192, Sept. 
7, 1994]

[[Page 12]]


<R04>
             Subpart B--Official Government Business Travel


<R05>
Sec. 301-1.100  Applicability.

    This subpart applies to employees as defined in Sec. 301-1.3(c)(2) 
who are traveling on official business.

[FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23654, May 23, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 301-1.101  Authorization of travel.

    (a) Travel policy. It is the policy of the Government that agencies 
shall authorize only that travel which is necessary to accomplish the 
purposes of the Government effectively and economically.
    (b) Agency responsibilities. (1) Except as otherwise provided by 
law, all travel shall be either authorized or approved by the head of 
the agency or by an official to whom such authority has been delegated. 
Ordinarily, a travel authorization shall be issued before the incurrence 
of the expenses. Agencies shall prescribe procedures for travel 
situations where it is not practical or possible to issue a written 
authorization in advance.
    (2) Agency heads shall communicate the Government's travel policy to 
all travel-authorizing officials at all levels within their respective 
agencies and establish controls to ensure that only travel that is 
essential to the purposes of the Government and for accomplishment of 
the agency's mission is authorized or approved.
    (3) Travel-authorizing officials shall authorize or approve only 
that travel necessary to accomplish the agency mission in the most 
effective and economical manner. Authorizing officials should be aware 
of travel plans, including plans to take annual leave in conjunction 
with travel, and shall ensure appropriate consideration of the need for 
the travel, the use of travel substitutes (i.e., mail, teleconferencing, 
etc.), and the most cost effective routing and means of accomplishing 
travel. Each employee's travel shall be authorized separately under 
specific guidelines provided in Sec. 301-1.102.
    (4) It is the policy of the Government, as reflected in the Hotel 
and Motel Fire Safety Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-391, Sept. 25, 1990), to 
save lives and protect property by promoting fire safety in hotels, 
motels, and all places of public accommodation affecting commerce. In 
furtherance of these goals, each agency, as defined in Sec. 301-17.2(a) 
of this chapter, when authorizing travel shall take appropriate measures 
to influence employees who will procure commercial lodging when 
performing official travel to stay at a firesafe approved accommodation 
as defined in Sec. 301-17.2(c) of this chapter.

[54 FR 20267, May 10, 1989. Redesignated and amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 
FR 23654, May 23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 39, 59 FR 46193, Sept. 7, 1994; FTR 
Amdt. 53; 61 FR 64998, Dec. 10, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-1.102  Guidelines for issuing travel authorizations.

    The travel policies and practices of each agency shall reflect, but 
not be limited to, the following guidelines:
    (a) Types and use of travel authorizations. General or blanket 
travel authorizations for entire agencies or groups of employees shall 
not be used. To ensure adequate managerial and supervisory attention to 
the need for all travel, employee travel shall be authorized under one 
of the following types of travel authorizations:
    (1) Unlimited open authorization. This type of authorization allows 
an employee to travel for any purpose without further authorization. 
Unlimited open authorizations shall be issued only for department or 
agency heads, their deputies, or other principal agency officials as the 
agency head or deputy may designate, and managers of major subunits 
where no supervisor is present.
    (2) Limited open authorization. This type of authorization allows an 
employee to travel without further authorization under certain specified 
conditions; i.e., travel to specific geographical area(s), for specific 
purpose(s), subject to trip cost ceilings, or for specific periods of 
time. Limited open authorizations may be provided for employees whose 
duties require frequent repetitive travel. Such authorizations, however, 
should be reviewed and revalidated at least quarterly and should include 
realistic limitations on purpose(s), geographic area(s), number of 
trip(s), trip duration, and costs.

[[Page 13]]

    (3) Trip-by-trip authorization. This type of authorization allows an 
individual or group of individuals to take one or more specific trips 
and shall include the specific purpose, itinerary, and estimated costs. 
Travel not covered in an unlimited or limited open authorization shall 
be separately authorized on a trip-by-trip basis.
    (b) Levels of approval and requirements for special purpose travel. 
Due to the relatively high costs associated with certain kinds of 
travel, such travel shall be authorized only on a trip-by-trip basis and 
reviewed at a level of authority sufficient to provide policy approval. 
The types of travel covered by this requirement are listed in this 
paragraph. Authorization of travel for purposes other than those listed 
should be delegated to the lowest management level which has 
responsibility for both program accomplishment and obligation or 
commitment of funds.
    (1) Conferences, meetings, and training sessions. Travel to 
conferences, meetings, and training sessions shall be authorized on a 
trip-by-trip basis. When authorizing travel for conference and meeting 
attendance, the approving official shall ensure that the number of 
attendees from the agency is necessary and justified in accordance with 
the provisions of part 301-16 of this chapter.
    (2) Foreign travel. Overseas and foreign travel for all employees 
shall be authorized on a trip-by-trip basis at as high an administrative 
level of authority as practical to provide policy approval. However, 
those employees whose duties require repetitive overseas and foreign 
travel or emergency overseas and foreign travel without advance 
notification may be issued limited or unlimited open authorizations, as 
appropriate, within the criteria of paragraphs (a) (1) and (2) of this 
section. In addition, U.S. Government representatives and attendees at 
international intergovernmental conferences must be accredited by the 
State Department.
    (3) Change of official station/relocation. Travel and related 
entitlements for a change of official station or relocation determined 
to be in the interest of the Government, as provided in chapter 302 of 
this title, shall be authorized on a move-by-move basis (trip-by-trip 
authorization). This also includes a new appointee covered under 
Sec. 302-1.2 of this subtitle when issued an authorization for travel to 
the first duty station.
    (c) Purpose(s) of travel. Each travel authorization and the 
associated travel voucher(s) (see Sec. 301-11.5(g)) shall specify 
clearly the purpose(s) of the travel. To establish uniformity in the way 
that travel purposes are identified on the travel authorization and 
travel voucher, agencies shall adopt travel purpose categories that 
conform to the extent possible with the following travel purpose 
categories:
    (1) Site visit. Travel to a particular site in order to personally 
perform operational or managerial activities (e.g., to oversee program 
activities, grant operations, or management activities for internal 
control purposes; carry out an audit, inspection, or repair activity; 
conduct negotiations; provide instructions; or provide technical 
assistance).
    (2) Information meeting. Travel to attend a meeting to discuss 
general agency operations, review status reports, or discuss topics of 
general interest. If a site visit was conducted as part of the same 
trip, consider the entire trip to be for the purpose of a site visit.
    (3) Training attendance. Travel to receive training.
    (4) Speech or presentation. Travel to make a speech or a 
presentation, deliver a paper, or otherwise take part in a formal 
program other than a training course.
    (5) Conference attendance. Travel to attend a conference, 
convention, seminar, or symposium for purposes of observation or 
education only, with no formal role in the proceedings.
    (6) Relocation. Travel performed in connection with a transfer from 
one official duty station to another (same as a permanent change of 
station or PCS move). This includes new appointees when they are first 
authorized relocation allowances for reporting to their first duty 
station.
    (7) Entitlement travel. Travel entitlements for which an employee 
(or dependent) may be eligible while serving at a duty station outside 
the continental United States; e.g., tour renewal agreement travel (for 
the purpose of taking leave between tours of duty)

[[Page 14]]

and educational travel. (This type of travel is normally performed in 
connection with a travel entitlement resulting from a change of station 
assignment or renewal of a tour of duty at duty stations located outside 
the continental United States.)
    (8) Special mission travel. Travel to carry out a special agency 
mission; e.g., move noncombat military units, provide security to a 
person or a shipment (such as a diplomatic pouch), move witnesses from 
residence to other locations, and travel by Federal beneficiaries and 
other nonemployees.
    (9) Emergency travel. Travel to return an employee from a temporary 
assignment location at Government expense to his/her designated post of 
duty or home, or other alternate location, where he/she would normally 
be present to take care of the emergency situation if the Government had 
not directed or assigned the employee to another location to perform 
official business.
    (10) Other travel purposes. All travel performed for purposes which 
are not included in one of the other listed categories. Even though 
stated as other travel purposes, the travel authorization and voucher 
should also detail a specific purpose.
    (d) Cost estimates. Travel authorizations shall include estimates of 
the cost of the travel. Both unlimited and limited open authorizations 
shall also include an estimate of the travel costs to be incurred over 
the period covered by the authorization. Agencies shall use these 
estimates to obligate the funds necessary to carry out that particular 
travel to improve travel budgetary controls. (See part 301-10 for 
provisions covering employee source of funds and travel advances.)

[54 FR 20267, May 10, 1989. Redesignated by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23654, 
May 23, 1991, and amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, June 26, 1992; 
FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58236, Oct. 29, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 301-1.103  Instructions/guidelines for travelers.

    (a) Traveler's potential liability notice. Travelers are accountable 
for all transportation tickets, Government transportation requests 
(GTR's), or other transportation procurement documents received by them 
in connection with their official travel. Agencies shall provide written 
instructions to the traveler at the time an authorization is issued 
advising of agency administrative procedures for the control of and 
accountability for passenger transportation documents. If trips are 
canceled or itineraries changed after tickets (or GTR's) are issued to 
the traveler, the traveler is liable for the value of the tickets issued 
until all ticket coupons have been used for official travel purposes or 
all unused tickets or coupons are properly accounted for on the travel 
voucher. (See also Sec. 301-11.5(c)(1).) A statement to this effect 
shall be incorporated on the travel authorization, or issued as a 
``Notice to Traveler'' and attached to the ticket or GTR when issued to 
the traveler. (See Sec. 301-3.5 for further provisions regarding unused 
passenger transportation documents.)
    (b) Promotional materials received in connection with official 
travel from common carriers, rental car companies, or other commercial 
source. Employees are obligated to account for any gift, gratuity, or 
benefit received from private sources incident to the performance of 
official business (Comp. Gen. Decision B-199656, July 15, 1981). All 
promotional materials (e.g., bonus flights, reduced-fare coupons, cash, 
merchandise, gifts, and credits toward future free or reduced costs of 
services or goods) received by employees in connection with official 
travel or incident to the purchase of a ticket for official travel, or 
other services such as car rentals, are due the Government and may not 
be retained by the employee. When an employee receives promotional 
material from any commercial source incident to official travel, the 
employee shall accept the material on behalf of the Federal Government 
and relinquish it to an appropriately designated agency official. The 
governing regulations regarding agency disposition of promotional 
material received by Federal employees are prescribed by the 
Administrator of General Services in 41 CFR 101-25.103. (See paragraph 
(f) of this section for redemption of frequent traveler benefits.)
    (c) Denied boarding compensation. Travelers shall be instructed to 
turn

[[Page 15]]

into the agency any cash or other payments received from carriers for 
failure to provide confirmed reserved space as provided in Sec. 301-3.5.
    (d) Billing information for ticket exchanges. When a traveler 
exchanges a ticket for one of lesser value, the carrier should issue a 
receipt or a ticket refund application and is required to make refund 
directly to the appropriate agency billing office. To facilitate this 
refund procedure, agencies shall provide travelers with a ``bill charges 
to'' address by attaching a copy of the GTR or some other document 
containing this information to either the ticket or travel authorization 
as provided in 41 CFR 101-41.210-1. (See also Sec. 301-3.5(c).)
    (e) Use of travel agencies. The services of a travel agent may be 
used to obtain passenger transportation services within, from, or 
between the United States and its possessions only under the conditions 
specified in Sec. 301-3.4(b)(2), or when the travel agent is providing 
services to the Government under a contractual arrangement with the 
General Services Administration.
    (f) Frequent traveler programs. (1) Frequent traveler benefits 
earned in connection with official travel, such as mileage credits, 
points, etc., may be used only for official travel. Employees may not 
retain and use such benefits for personal travel. Since the Comptroller 
General has ruled that a frequent traveler benefit is the property of 
the Government if any part of it is earned through official travel, 
employees should maintain separate frequent traveler accounts for 
official and personal travel.
    (2) Agencies should encourage employees who travel frequently to 
participate in various frequent traveler programs offered by airlines, 
hotels, and car rental vendors. Employees may be reimbursed for the cost 
to enter certain frequent traveler programs when enering the program is 
expected to result in a savings to the Government. Reimbursement for the 
cost to enter the program may not exceed the expected amount of the 
savings.
    (3) To the maximum extent practicable, overall travel costs should 
be reduced by using benefits earned through frequent traveler programs 
to obtain free airline tickets, rooms, and rental vehicles. (See 
Sec. 301-3.3(d)(5)(vii) of this chapter for upgrades to premium-class 
other than first-class accommodations.
    (4) Use of mandatory or preferred vendors, such as contract air and 
rail carriers, lowest cost car rental companies, etc., shall be observed 
fully without regard to whether such vendors offer frequent traveler 
programs. No deviations from mandatory or preferred use requirements 
will be permitted solely for the purpose of accumulating frequent 
traveler benefits.

[54 FR 20267, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 3, 54 FR 47523, Nov. 
15, 1989; FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41525, Oct. 12, 1990. Redesignated by FTR 
Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23654, May 23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58236, Oct. 29, 
1993]


<R04>
               Subpart C--Pre-Employment Interview Travel

    Source: FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23654, May 23, 1991, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R05>
Sec. 301-1.200  Applicability.

    (a) Individuals covered. This subpart is applicable to interviewees 
as defined in Sec. 301-1.3(c)(3).
    (b) Policy. Unless otherwise stated, the allowances established in 
this subpart for interviewees are analogous to those available to 
Federal employees traveling on official Government business. However, an 
agency is not required to offer all allowances to each interviewee. (See 
Sec. 301-1.203(a)(2).)


<R05>
Sec. 301-1.201  Authorization of travel.

    (a) Authority for payment. Agencies may pay allowable pre-employment 
interview travel expenses (as defined in Sec. 301-1.203) for individuals 
determined eligible under paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Eligibility determination. Each agency shall establish criteria 
for determining which applicants will qualify for the payment of pre-
employment interview travel expenses. The Office of Personnel Management 
has issued guidelines at 5 CFR part 572 for agencies to follow in making 
these personnel determinations.

[[Page 16]]


<R05>
Sec. 301-1.202  Responsibilities for pre-employment interview travel.

    (a) Agency responsibilities--(1) General rule. Agencies shall adhere 
to the general travel authorization policies and practices contained in 
subpart B of this part.
    (2) Limitations on type of authorization. Pre-employment interview 
travel may be authorized only on a trip-by-trip basis. Limited or 
unlimited open authorizations shall not be used for pre-employment 
interview travel.
    (3) Responsibility of agencies to inform interviewees of Government 
travel policies. Agencies shall communicate the Government travel rules 
and procedures to interviewees. Agencies should ensure the interviewee 
understands how travel reimbursements are calculated. Agencies also 
should provide assistance to the interviewee in the preparation of 
travel vouchers.
    (4) Limitations on the ability of agencies to authorize pre-
employment travel expenses to defray unauthorized relocation expenses. 
Agencies shall not authorize pre-employment interview travel expense 
reimbursement for the purpose of helping defray relocation expenses that 
are not allowable for a new appointee under Sec. 302-1.10. For example, 
an agency may not pay pre-employment travel expenses under this subpart 
so that an interviewee/new appointee may look for a house at his/her 
prospective first duty station.
    (5) Fire safety responsibilities. Agencies should encourage an 
interviewee for his/her safety to stay in an approved accommodation 
while performing interview travel, and shall provide the interviewee 
with a list of approved accommodations in the interview area.
    (b) Interviewee responsibilities--(1) General rule. The interviewee 
is expected to exercise the same care in incurring expenses that a 
prudent person would exercise if traveling on personal business.
    (2) Use of travel agencies. Tickets should be provided by the 
interviewing agency. However, the interviewing agency may authorize the 
interviewee to obtain tickets directly from a travel management center 
under contract to the Government.
    (3) Use of contract carriers. Interviewees of mandatory users of the 
Government's city pair contracts with airlines and Amtrak are bound by 
rules outlined in Sec. 301-2.2 (c) and (d)(1)(ii)(A).
    (4) Interviewee's potential liability notice. The interviewee is 
accountable for all transportation tickets and U.S. Government 
Transportation Requests (GTR's) issued for use in performing pre-
employment interview travel. Agencies shall provide written instructions 
to the interviewee at the time an authorization is issued explaining 
agency administrative procedures for controlling and accounting for 
passenger transportation documents. If the interview trip is cancelled 
or rescheduled after tickets (or GTR's) are issued to the interviewee, 
the interviewee is liable for the value of the tickets issued until all 
ticket coupons have been used for pre-employment interview travel or all 
unused tickets or coupons have been properly accounted for on the travel 
voucher. A statement to this effect shall be incorporated on the travel 
authorization, or issued as a ``Notice to Traveler'' and attached to the 
ticket or GTR when issued to the interviewee. The interviewee and the 
interviewing agency shall be bound by the same rules that apply to 
employee travelers and agencies in Sec. 301-3.5.
    (5) Billing information for ticket exchanges. When an interviewee 
exchanges a ticket for one of lesser value, the carrier should issue a 
receipt or a ticket refund application and is required to make refund 
directly to the appropriate agency billing office. To facilitate this 
refund procedure, agencies shall provide interviewees with a ``bill 
charges to'' address by attaching a copy of the GTR or some other 
document containing this information to either the ticket or travel 
authorization as provided in 41 CFR 101-41.210-1.
    (6) Fire safety responsibilities. It is the policy of the 
Government, as reflected in the Hotel and Motel Fire Safety Act of 1990 
(Pub. L. 101-391, Sept. 25, 1990), referred to as ``the Act'' in this 
paragraph, to save lives and protect property by promoting fire safety 
in hotels, motels, and all places of public accommodation affecting 
commerce. In furtherance of the Act's goals, an interviewee traveling to 
a pre-employment interview is strongly encouraged to stay at an approved 
accommodation

[[Page 17]]

as defined in Sec. 301-17.2(c) of this chapter when commercial lodging 
is required. An approved accommodation provides certain fire detection 
and safety devices that reduce the likelihood of injury to, and protect 
the lives of, travelers.

[FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23654, May 23, 1991, as amended by FTR Amdt. 39, 59 
FR 46193, Sept. 7, 1994; FTR Amdt. 53; 61 FR 64998, Dec. 10, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-1.203  Allowable reimbursements.

    (a) Allowable expenses. (1) An agency may pay to or on behalf of an 
interviewee the same travel expenses to which a Government employee 
traveling on official business would be entitled, with the exception of 
those expenses listed in paragraph (b) of this section. Allowable 
expenses are subject to the limitations applicable to a Government 
employee traveling on official business.
    (2) An agency may pay all or a part of pre-employment travel 
expenses. However, an agency electing to pay only subsistence or only 
common carrier transportation costs must pay the full amount to which a 
Government employee would be entitled for those expenses authorized. 
Paying less than the full reimbursement for common carrier tickets could 
make the interviewee ineligible for Government discounts.
    (b) Unallowable expenses. An agency shall not pay expenses for:
    (1) Use of communication services as defined in part 301-6 for 
purposes other than communication directly related to travel 
arrangements for the Government interview.
    (2) Hire of a room as defined in Sec. 301-9.1(b).


<R05>
Sec. 301-1.204  Sources of funds.

    (a) Payment of travel expenses--(1) Transportation expenses by 
common carrier, other than local transportation. Interviewee 
transportation by common carrier, other than local transportation, shall 
be paid for through the use of a GTR or a centrally billed account as 
provided in Sec. 301-15.45. Common carrier transportation includes air, 
bus, and rail.
    (2) Other authorized expenses. All other authorized expenses shall 
be paid for by the interviewee. The agency shall reimburse the 
interviewee for allowable travel expenses upon submission and approval 
of a travel voucher.
    (b) Unallowable sources--(1) Government issued individual employee 
charge cards. Individual employee charge cards (see Sec. 301-15.44) may 
not be used for pre-employment interview travel. However, centrally 
billed accounts (see Sec. 301-15.45) may be used to pay the 
interviewee's allowable transportation expenses.
    (2) Travel advances. An interviewee shall not be issued a travel 
advance.
    (3) Travelers checks. Government contractor issued travelers checks 
(see Sec. 301-15.46) may not be used for pre-employment interview 
travel.


<R05>
Sec. 301-1.205  Claims for reimbursement.

    (a) Fraudulent claims. A claim against the United States is 
forfeited if the claimant attempts to defraud the Government in 
connection therewith (28 U.S.C. 2514). In addition, there are two 
criminal provisions under which severe penalties may be imposed on a 
traveler who knowingly presents a false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim 
against the United States (18 U.S.C. 287 and 1001).
    (b) Maintenance of receipts and records. All interviewees authorized 
to travel should keep a record of expenditures properly chargeable to 
the Government. Although receipt requirements vary with the method of 
reimbursement, it would be prudent for interviewees to retain all 
receipts until reimbursement claims are settled. The agency should alert 
the interviewee to such requirements.
    (c) Preparation and submission of travel vouchers. (1) Interviewees 
are responsible for the preparation and submission of travel vouchers, 
although agencies should assist in this process. Travel voucher forms 
may be typed or handwritten in ink. Only the original travel voucher 
must be signed by the interviewee.
    (2) Agencies are to prescribe the administrative procedures, 
consistent with those in Sec. 301-11.4, for interviewees to follow in 
submitting travel vouchers.
    (d) Review of travel vouchers of interviewees. Agencies shall review 
the travel vouchers of interviewees in the

[[Page 18]]

same manner as they review the travel vouchers of Government employees 
on official business travel as provided in part 301-11.

[FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23654, May 23, 1991, as amended by FTR Amdt. 39, 59 
FR 46193, Sept. 7, 1994; FTR Amdt. 53; 61 FR 64998, Dec. 10, 1996]


<R03>
PART 301-2--TRANSPORTATION ALLOWABLE--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301-2.1  Expenses payable as transportation.
301-2.2  Methods of transportation.
301-2.3  Local transportation.
301-2.4  Emergency travel due to illness or injury or a personal 
          emergency situation.
301-2.5  Routing of travel.
301-2.6  Use of Government-furnished vehicles.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5701-5709; E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13747, 3 CFR, 1971-
1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: 54 FR 20270, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 301-2.1  Expenses payable as transportation.

    Transportation expenses which the Government may pay either directly 
or through reimbursement include fares, rental fees, mileage payments, 
and any expenses incident to transportation such as baggage transfer; 
official telegraph, telephone, radio, and cable messages in connection 
with items classed as transportation; steamer chairs, steamer cushions, 
and steamer rugs at customary rates actually charged; staterooms on 
steamers; and other expenses set forth in parts 301-2 through 301-6.


<R05>
Sec. 301-2.2  Methods of transportation.

    (a) Authorized methods. Methods of transportation authorized for 
official travel include railroads, airlines, helicopter service, ships, 
buses, streetcars, subways, and taxicabs; Government-furnished and 
contract rental automobiles and airplanes; and any other necessary means 
of conveyance.
    (b) Selecting method of transportation to be used. Travel on 
official business shall be by the method of transportation which will 
result in the greatest advantage to the Government, cost and other 
factors considered. In selecting a particular method of transportation 
to be used, consideration shall be given to energy conservation and to 
the total cost to the Government, including costs of per diem, overtime, 
lost worktime, and actual transportation costs. Additional factors to be 
considered are the total distance of travel, the number of points 
visited, and the number of travelers. As stated in 5 U.S.C. 5733, 
``travel of an employee shall be by the most expeditious means of 
transportation practicable and shall be commensurate with the nature and 
purpose of the duties of the employee requiring such travel.''
    (c) Traveler's cost liability when selected method is not used. The 
traveler shall use the method of transportation administratively 
authorized or approved by the agency as most advantageous to the 
Government. (See Sec. 301-2.2(b).) Any additional cost resulting from 
use of a method of transportation other than that specifically 
authorized, approved, or required by regulation, e.g., contract air 
service (see paragraph (d)(1)(ii)(A) of this section), shall be the 
traveler's responsibility.
    (d) Presumptions as to most advantageous method of transportation--
(1) Common carrier--(i) General. Travel by common carrier (air, rail, or 
bus) generally results in the most efficient use of energy resources and 
in the least costly and most expeditious performance of travel. 
Therefore, this method shall be used whenever it is reasonably 
available. Other methods of transportation may be authorized as 
advantageous only when the use of common carrier transportation would 
seriously interfere with the performance of official business or impose 
an undue hardship upon the traveler, or when the total cost by common 
carrier would exceed the cost by some other method of transportation. 
The determination that another method of transportation would be more 
advantageous to the Government than common carrier transportation shall 
not be made on the basis of personal preference or minor inconvenience 
to the traveler resulting from common carrier scheduling.
    (ii) Selecting the most advantageous method of common carrier 
transportation--(A) Contract air service. The use

[[Page 19]]

of discount fares offered by contract air carriers between certain 
cities (city-pairs) is considered advantageous to the Government and is 
mandatory for authorized air travel between those city-pairs. (See 
Sec. 301-3.4(b)(1)(ii) and part 301-15, subpart B for policy and 
specific guidelines and exceptions.)
    (B) Noncontract air service. The use of noncontract air service may 
be authorized or approved only when justified under the conditions 
provided in part 301-15, subpart B. Advance authorization and the 
justification for the use of noncontract air service shall be shown on 
the travel order or other form of travel authorization before the actual 
travel begins, unless extenuating circumstances or emergency situations 
make advance authorization impossible. In those events, the employee 
shall obtain written approval from the appropriate agency official at 
the earliest possible time after completing the travel. The approval and 
justification therefor shall be stated on or attached to the travel 
voucher.
    (C) Rail or bus service. Rail or bus service may be used when 
determined by the agency to be advantageous to the Government, cost, 
energy, and other factors considered, and when compatible with the 
requirements of the official travel. The use of contract or other 
discount fares offered to the Government by rail or bus carriers between 
selected cities (city-pairs) is considered advantageous. Whenever these 
discount fares are offered and the accompanying service will fulfill 
mission requirements, they should be used to the maximum extent 
possible. See part 301-15, subpart B for policy and specific guidelines 
for use of contract rail service. See also Secs. 301-3.3(b) and 301-
3.4(b) for authorized service and accommodations and reduced fares.
    (2) Government-contract rental or Government-furnished automobiles. 
When it is determined that an automobile is required for official 
travel, a Government-contract or a Government-furnished automobile shall 
be used as follows:
    (i) A Government-contract rental automobile is the first resource 
for short-term rental of an automobile by an employee on temporary duty 
(TDY) travel. This applies to employees who travel to their destination 
by common carrier, such as airplane, train, or bus, and would 
customarily rent a Government-furnished vehicle for local transportation 
in the destination area. An employee may also use a Government-furnished 
automobile if a Government-contract rental automobile is unavailable or 
if use of a Government-furnished automobile is practicable. Government-
furnished automobiles will continue to be available for use in isolated 
areas where commercial rental contractors are not available.
    (ii) A Government-furnished automobile is the first resource when an 
automobile is required for official travel performed locally or within 
commuting distance of an employee's designated post of duty. If a 
Government-furnished automobile is unavailable, a Government-contract 
rental automobile may be used.
    (iii) If cost considerations are used in determining whether a 
Government-contract rental or a Government-furnished automobile should 
be authorized under this policy, the overall cost shall include any 
administrative costs as well as any costs associated with picking up and 
returning the automobile.
    (3) Privately owned conveyance. The use of a privately owned 
conveyance shall be authorized only when its use is advantageous to the 
Government, except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section. A 
determination that the use of a privately owned conveyance would be 
advantageous to the Government shall be preceded by a determination that 
transportation by common carrier, a Government-contract rental 
automobile, or Government-furnished transportation is not available or 
would not be advantageous to the Government. To the maximum extent 
possible, these determinations and the authorization to use a privately 
owned conveyance shall be made before the performance of travel.
    (4) Special conveyance. Commercially rented vehicles, other than 
those under contract, and other special conveyances shall be used only 
when it is determined that use of other methods of transportation 
discussed in this paragraph would not be more advantageous to the 
Government. In the selection of commercially rented vehicles, first

[[Page 20]]

consideration shall be given to Government-contract rental vehicles 
available under an appropriate GSA Federal Supply Schedule contract.
    (e) Permissive use of a privately owned conveyance. When an employee 
uses a privately owned conveyance as a matter of personal preference and 
such use is compatible with the performance of official business, 
although not determined to be advantageous to the Government under 
paragraph (d)(3) of this section, such use may be authorized or approved 
provided that reimbursement is limited in accordance with the provisions 
of part 301-4.
    (f) Travel by ocean vessel. Except for travel between points served 
by ferries, travel by ocean vessel shall not be regarded as advantageous 
to the Government in the absence of sufficient justification that the 
advantages accruing from the use of ocean transportation offset the 
higher costs associated with this method of transportation; i.e., per 
diem, transportation, and lost worktime. Authority to authorize or 
approve travel by ocean vessel shall be obtained at the highest 
administrative level consistent with agency travel management policy. 
The requirements of Sec. 301-3.6(a) for use of United States flag ships 
shall be observed. (See Sec. 301-3.3(c) for authorized vessel 
accommodations.)

[54 FR 20270, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 9, 55 FR 10769, Mar. 
23, 1990; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-2.3  Local transportation.

    (a) To, from, and between places of work. Transportation by bus or 
streetcar between places of business at an official station or a 
temporary duty station and between places of lodging and place of 
business at a temporary duty station is allowed as a transportation 
expense. (Concerning transportation by taxicab between such places, see 
Sec. 301-3.1.)
    (b) To places where meals are obtained. Where the nature and 
location of the work at a temporary duty station are such that suitable 
meals cannot be obtained there, the expense of daily travel required to 
obtain meals at the nearest available place may be approved as necessary 
transportation not incidental to subsistence. A statement of the 
necessity for such daily travel shall accompany the travel voucher.
    (c) To and from carrier terminals. (1) Reimbursement shall be 
allowed for the usual taxicab and airport limousine fares, plus tip, 
between a common carrier or other terminal and either the employee's 
home or place of business at the official duty station or place of 
business or lodging at a temporary duty point, or between the airport 
and airport limousine terminal. However, available courtesy 
transportation service furnished by hotels/motels should be used by 
employees to the maximum extent possible as a first source of 
transportation between place of lodging at the temporary duty point and 
common carrier terminal. Reimbursement shall be allowed for tips when 
courtesy transportation service is used.
    (2) An agency shall, when appropriate, restrict the use of taxicabs 
under paragraph (c)(1) of this section or place a monetary limit on the 
amount of taxicab reimbursement when:
    (i) Suitable Government or common carrier transportation service, 
including airport limousine service, is available for all or part of the 
distance involved; or
    (ii) Courtesy transportation service is provided by hotels/motels 
between the place of lodging at the temporary duty site and the common 
carrier terminal.
    (d) Between residence and office on day travel is performed. 
Reimbursement may be authorized or approved for the usual taxicab fares, 
plus tip, from the employee's home to his/her office on the day he/she 
departs from the office on an official trip requiring at least one 
night's lodging and from the office to his/her home on the day he/she 
returns to the office from the trip, in addition to taxi fares for 
travel between office and carrier terminal.
    (e) Between residence and office in cases of necessity. 
Reimbursement for the usual taxicab fares paid by an employee for travel 
between office and home may be authorized or approved incident to the 
conduct of official business at an employee's designated post of duty 
when the employee is dependent on public transportation for such travel 
incident to officially ordered work outside of regular working hours

[[Page 21]]

and when the travel is during hours of infrequently scheduled public 
transportation or darkness. Agencies are expected to establish stringent 
administrative controls at sufficiently high levels which ensure that 
reimbursements are authorized only when justifiable and when all 
circumstances set forth in this paragraph are met.

[54 FR 20270, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-2.4  Emergency travel due to illness or injury or a personal emergency situation.

    Provisions governing reimbursement for allowable transportation in 
connection with emergency travel due to illness or injury or a personal 
emergency situation are set forth in part 301-12.


<R05>
Sec. 301-2.5  Routing of travel.

    (a) Official necessity. All travel shall be by a usually traveled 
route. Travel by other routes may be allowed when the official necessity 
therefor is satisfactorily established.
    (b) Indirect-route or interrupted travel. When a person for his/her 
own convenience travels by an indirect route or interrupts travel by 
direct route, the extra expense shall be borne by him/her. Reimbursement 
for expenses shall be based only on such charges as would have been 
incurred by a usually traveled route. An employee may not use contract 
airline/rail passenger service provided under contract with the General 
Services Administration (see part 301-15, subpart B, of this chapter) 
for that portion of travel by an indirect route which is for personal 
convenience. Additionally, an employee may not use a U.S. Government 
Transportation Request (GTR) (see Sec. 301-10.2 of this chapter) or a 
contractor-issued charge card (see part 301-15, subpart C, of this 
chapter) for procurement of commercial carrier transportation services 
for that portion of travel by an indirect route which is for personal 
convenience. An employee may, however, use contract airline/rail 
passenger service, as well as a GTR or contractor-issued charge card, 
for portions of travel that are authorized to be performed at Government 
expense. (See Sec. 301-11.5(a)(3) of this chapter regarding 
reimbursement claims for travel that involves an indirect route.)

[54 FR 20270, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58236, 
Oct. 29, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 301-2.6  Use of Government-furnished vehicles.

    (a) Use limited to official purposes. When a Government-furnished 
vehicle is used by an employee for official travel, its use shall be 
limited to official purposes (31 U.S.C. 1344 as implemented in 41 CFR 
101-38.3) which include transportation between places where the 
employee's presence is required incident to official business; between 
such places and places of temporary lodging when public transportation 
is unavailable or its use is impractical; and between either of the 
above places and suitable eating places, drug stores, barber shops, 
places of worship, cleaning establishments, and similar places necessary 
for the sustenance, comfort, or health of the employee to foster the 
continued efficient performance of Government business.
    (b) Government driver's identification card. Under instructions 
prescribed by the Office of Personnel Management, a Federal employee who 
must occasionally use a Government-furnished vehicle for official 
business while on temporary duty away from his/her official station need 
not possess a Standard Form 46, U.S. Government Motor Vehicle Operator's 
Identification Card, if he/she holds a valid State, District of 
Columbia, or territorial motor vehicle operator's license and presents 
travel orders specifically authorizing the temporary use of a 
Government-furnished vehicle.
    (c) Vehicle not available. If a Government-furnished vehicle is not 
available when required as a first resource, a Government-contract 
rental or other commercially rented vehicle may be used provided such 
use is consistent with Sec. 301-2.2(c) and the regulations and 
authorizations of the employee's agency.
    (d) Use of Government aircraft. Agencies may authorize an employee 
to travel on a Government aircraft, if use

[[Page 22]]

of the aircraft is justified under provisions of Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-126.

[54 FR 20270, May 10, 1989, as amended at 57 FR 54305, Nov. 18, 1992]


<R03>
PART 301-3--USE OF COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301-3.1  Taxicabs.
301-3.2  Rental automobiles and special conveyances.
301-3.3  Travel policy and class of service authorized.
301-3.4  Special fares.
301-3.5  Unused, downgraded, canceled, or oversold transportation 
          services.
301-3.6  Use of United States flag carriers.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5707.


<R05>
Sec. 301-3.1  Taxicabs.

    (a) Approval requirement. For local travel authorized under 
Sec. 301-2.3 (a) and (b), the use of taxicabs may be allowed if 
authorized or approved as advantageous to the Government. General 
authorization for use of taxicabs for local travel in certain situations 
is contained in Sec. 301-2.3 (c), (d), and (e).
    (b) Tips. In addition to reimbursement of taxi fare, the employee 
will be allowed reimbursement of tips in the amount of 15 cents when the 
fare is $1 or less or 15 percent of the reimbursable fare when it 
exceeds $1. If the 15 percent is not a multiple of 5, the reimbursable 
tip may be increased to the next multiple of 5.

[54 FR 20272, May 10, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 301-3.2  Rental automobiles and special conveyances.

    (a) Approval requirement. The hire of boat, automobile, taxicab 
(other than for use under Sec. 301-2.3 (c), (d), or (e)), aircraft, 
livery, or other conveyance will be allowed if authorized or approved as 
advantageous to the Government whenever the employee is engaged in 
official business within or outside his/her designated post of duty.
    (b) Incidental charges. If the hire of a special conveyance does not 
include costs of the incidental expenses of gasoline or oil, feeding and 
stabling horses, rent of garage, hangar, or boathouse, subsistence of 
operator, ferriage, tolls, etc., the same should be first paid, if 
practicable, by the person furnishing the accommodation or by the 
operator, and should be itemized in the bill. (See Secs. 301-11.3(c)(5) 
and 301-11.5(c)(2).)
    (c) Damage waiver or insurance costs. Commercial vehicle rental 
contracts customarily include full insurance coverage for property 
damage or injury or death to third parties resulting from the renter's 
use of the vehicle. Damage to the rented vehicle (collision damage), 
however, is often covered only above a deductible amount specified in 
the rental contract, the renter being responsible for the cost of damage 
below that amount. In such instances, additional insurance (collision 
damage waiver or collision damage insurance) to relieve the renter from 
liability for damage to the vehicle up to a deductible amount is 
available in the rental contract for an extra fee.
    (1) Agencies may not pay or reimburse the employee for the cost of 
collision damage waiver or collision damage insurance when official 
travel in the rental vehicle is performed wholly within the continental 
United States, Alaska, Hawaii, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or the 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or a United States 
territory or possession. However, agencies are authorized to pay for 
damage to the rented vehicle up to the deductible amount contained in 
the rental contract if the damage occurs while the vehicle is being used 
for official business.
    (2) Agencies may pay or reimburse the employee for the cost of 
collision damage waiver or collision damage insurance when the vehicle 
is rented or leased for official travel in foreign areas (areas other 
than those listed in paragraph (c)(1) of this section) and rental or 
leasing agency requirements, foreign statute, or legal procedures which 
could cause extreme difficulty to Government employees involved in an 
accident make such insurance necessary.
    (3) The cost of personal accident insurance is a personal expense 
and is not reimbursable.
    (d) Hire from another employee or member of an employee's family. 
Charges for the hire of a conveyance of another

[[Page 23]]

Government employee, a member of the traveler's family, or a member of 
the family of another Government employee shall not be allowed in the 
absence of a satisfactory showing that the conveyance was not procured 
because of such personal or official relationship and that the member of 
the family so furnishing was not dependent upon the traveler for 
support. The material facts shall be reported in the account. (See 
Secs. 301-4.5 and 301-11.5(d).)
    (e) Persons traveling together. When two or more persons travel 
together by means of a rented vehicle or special conveyance, that fact, 
together with the name of each traveler and the name of his/her 
employing agency, must be stated by each traveler on his/her travel 
voucher.

[54 FR 20272, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41525, 
Oct. 12, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 301-3.3  Travel policy and class of service authorized.

    (a) General policy. It is the general policy of the Government that 
less-than-premium-class accommodations shall be used for all modes of 
passenger transportation. The rules in paragraphs (b) through (d) of 
this section govern the use of common carrier accommodations and apply 
to both domestic and international travel of civilian employees while on 
official Government business. Agencies shall report the use of first-
class accommodations to the General Services Administration in 
accordance with paragraph (e) of this section.
    (b) Train accommodations--(1) Policy. It is the policy of the 
Government that employees who travel by train shall use coach-class 
accommodations. When adequate reserved coach accommodations are 
available, officials authorizing travel shall require that those 
accommodations be used to the maximum extent possible. For overnight 
train travel, employees shall use slumber coach sleeping accommodations 
except as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section. First-class 
train accommodations may be used only as permitted in paragraph (b)(3) 
of this section.
    (2) Definitions. The following definitions apply throughout 
paragraph (b) of this section:

    (i) Coach-class train accommodations. The term ``coach-class train 
accommodations'' means the basic class of train accommodations offered 
by rail carriers to passengers which includes a level of service that is 
available to all passengers regardless of the fare paid. The term 
``coach-class train accommodations'' includes reserved coach 
accommodations, as well as slumber coach accommodations, when overnight 
travel is involved.
    (ii) Slumber coach accommodations. The term ``slumber coach 
accommodations'' includes slumber coach accommodations on trains 
offering such accommodations, or the lowest level of sleeping 
accommodations available on a train that does not offer slumber coach 
accommodations.
    (iii) First-class train accommodations. The term ``first-class train 
accommodations'' includes bedrooms, roomettes, club service, parlor car 
accommodations, or other premium accommodations. (See paragraph (b)(5) 
of this section for the rules governing extra-fare trains.) First-class 
train accommodations may be authorized in accordance with paragraph 
(b)(3) of this section only when justified by circumstances listed in 
paragraph (b)(4) of this section.
    (iv) Extra-fare train. The term ``extra-fare train'' means a train 
that operates at an increased fare due to the extra performance of the 
train (i.e., faster speed or fewer stops). The term ``extra-fare train'' 
does not mean first-class train accommodations, even though an extra-
fare train may offer first-class accommodations. (See paragraph (b)(5) 
of this section for rules governing the use of extra-fare train 
service.)
    (3) Authorization or approval of the use of first-class train 
accommodations--(i) Authorization or approval. Heads of agencies may 
authorize or approve the use of first-class train accommodations under 
criteria specified in paragraph (b)(4) of this section. For ease of 
administration, heads of agencies may delegate, with provisions for 
limited redelegation, authority to authorize or approve first-class 
train accommodations under paragraph (b) of this section, provided that 
appropriate guidelines in the form of regulations or

[[Page 24]]

other written instructions are furnished to the designee. The delegation 
or redelegation of authority to authorize or approve first-class train 
accommodations shall be held to as high an administrative level as 
practical to ensure adequate consideration and review of circumstances 
requiring the need for first-class train accommodations.
    (ii) Requirements. Authorization for the use of first-class train 
accommodations shall be made in advance of the actual travel unless 
extenuating circumstances or emergency situations make advance 
authorization impossible. If advance authorization cannot be obtained, 
the employee shall obtain written approval from the agency head, or his/
her designee, at the earliest possible time.
    (4) Use of first-class train accommodations. Circumstances 
justifying the use of first-class train accommodations are limited to 
those listed in paragraphs (b)(4) (i) through (iii) of this section.
    (i) No reasonably available coach-class train accommodations. When 
travel by train has been authorized as advantageous to the Government, 
the use of first-class train accommodations may be authorized or 
approved only when no coach-class train accommodations are reasonably 
available. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section, 
``reasonably available'' means coach-class train accommodations that are 
available and that are scheduled to leave within 24 hours of the 
employee's proposed departure time, or scheduled to arrive within 24 
hours of the employee's proposed arrival time. In the case of a direct 
route that requires overnight travel, ``reasonably available'' shall be 
based on the availability of slumber coach sleeping accommodations. 
``Reasonably available'' does not include any accommodation with a 
scheduled arrival time that is later than the employee's required 
reporting time at the duty site, or with a scheduled departure time that 
is earlier than the time the employee is scheduled to complete duty.
    (ii) Travel by an employee with a disability. The use of first-class 
train accommodations may be authorized or approved when necessary to 
accommodate an employee's disability or other physical impairment, and 
the employee's condition is substantiated in writing by competent 
medical authority. The use of first-class train accommodations also may 
be authorized for an attendant, who is authorized under Sec. 301-
9.2(c)(1) of this chapter to accompany the employee, when the employee 
is authorized use of first-class accommodations and requires the 
attendant's services en route.
    (iii) Security reasons. The use of first-class train accommodations 
may be authorized or approved when exceptional security circumstances 
require such travel. Exceptional security circumstances include, but are 
not limited to:
    (A) Travel by an employee whose use of coach-class train 
accommodations would endanger the employee's life or Government 
property;
    (B) Travel by agents who are in charge of protective details and who 
are accompanying individuals authorized to use first-class train 
accommodations; and
    (C) Travel by couriers and control officers who are accompanying 
controlled pouches or packages.
    (iv) Inadequate foreign coach-class train accommodations. The use of 
first-class train accommodations may be authorized or approved when 
coach-class train accommodations on a foreign rail carrier do not 
provide adequate sanitation or health standards.
    (5) Extra-fare train service. Coach-class travel by extra-fare 
trains may be authorized or approved whenever such use is 
administratively determined to be more advantageous to the Government or 
is required for security reasons. The use of National Railroad Passenger 
Corporation (AMTRAK) Metroliner coach accommodations is considered to be 
advantageous to the Government. Metroliner Club Service is deemed first-
class accommodations. First-class accommodations on extra-fare trains 
may be authorized only as provided in paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (c) Steamer accommodations--(1) Policy. It is the policy of the 
Government that employees who travel by steamer shall use the lowest-
class steamer accommodations. Authority to authorize all travel by ocean 
vessel shall remain at as high a level as practical in accordance with 
Sec. 301-2.2(f) of this chapter.

[[Page 25]]

First-class steamer accommodations may be used only as permitted in 
paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
    (2) Definitions. The following definitions apply throughout 
paragraph (c) of this section:

    (i) Steamer. The term ``steamer'' includes any ocean vessel that 
provides accommodations for passenger travel. The term ``steamer'' does 
not include local commuter launches.
    (ii) Lowest-class steamer accommodations. The term ``lowest-class 
steamer accommodations'' means the least expensive class of reserved 
accommodations available on a steamer.
    (iii) First-class steamer accommodations. The term ``first-class 
steamer accommodations'' includes all accommodations classes above the 
lowest class, including but not limited to suites.
    (3) Authorization or approval of the use of first-class steamer 
accommodations--(i) Authorization or approval. Heads of agencies may 
authorize or approve the use of first-class steamer accommodations under 
criteria specified in paragraph (c)(4) of this section. For ease of 
administration, heads of agencies may delegate, with provisions for 
limited redelegation, authority to authorize or approve first-class 
steamer accommodations under paragraph (c) of this section, provided 
that appropriate guidelines in the form of regulations or other written 
instructions are furnished to the designee. The delegation or 
redelegation of authority to authorize or approve first-class steamer 
accommodations shall be held to as high an administrative level as 
practical to ensure adequate consideration and review of the 
circumstances requiring the need for first-class steamer accommodations.
    (ii) Requirements. Authorization for the use of first-class steamer 
accommodations shall be made in advance of the actual travel unless 
extenuating circumstances or emergency situations make advance 
authorization impossible. If advance authorization cannot be obtained, 
the employee shall obtain written approval from the agency head, or his/
her designee, at the earliest possible time.
    (4) Use of first-class steamer accommodations. Circumstances 
justifying the use of first-class steamer accommodations are limited to 
those specified in paragraphs (c)(4) (i) through (iii) of this section.
    (i) No other accommodations. The use of first-class steamer 
accommodations may be authorized or approved only when lowest-class 
steamer accommodations are not available on the vessel.
    (ii) Travel by an employee with a disability. The use of first-class 
steamer accommodations may be authorized or approved when necessary to 
accommodate an employee's disability or other physical impairment, and 
the employee's condition is substantiated in writing by competent 
medical authority. The use of first-class steamer accommodations also 
may be authorized for an attendant, who is authorized under Sec. 301-
9.2(c)(1) of this chapter to accompany the employee, when the employee 
is authorized use of first-class accommodations and requires the 
attendant's services en route.
    (iii) Security reasons. The use of first-class steamer 
accommodations may be authorized or approved when exceptional security 
circumstances require such travel. Exceptional security circumstances 
include, but are not limited to:
    (A) Travel by an employee whose use of lowest-class accommodations 
would endanger the employee's life or Government property;
    (B) Travel by agents who are in charge of protective details and who 
are accompanying individuals authorized to use first-class 
accommodations; and
    (C) Travel by couriers and control officers who are accompanying 
controlled pouches or packages.
    (d) Airline accommodations--(1) Policy. It is the policy of the 
Government that employees who use commercial air carriers for domestic 
and international travel on official business shall use coach-class 
airline accommodations. First-class airline accommodations may be used 
only as permitted in paragraph (d)(4) of this section. Premium-class 
other than first-class airline accommodations may be used only as 
permitted in paragraph (d)(5) of this section.

[[Page 26]]

    (2) Definitions. The following definitions apply throughout 
paragraph (d) of this section.
    (i) Coach-class airline accommodations. The term ``coach-class 
airline accommodations'' means the basic class of accommodations offered 
by an air carrier to passengers which includes a level of service that 
is available to all passengers regardless of the fare paid. The term 
``coach-class airline accommodations'' applies when an airline offers 
only one class of accommodations; the term also includes tourist-class 
accommodations and economy-class accommodations.
    (ii) Premium-class airline accommodations. The term ``premium-class 
airline accommodations'' means any class of accommodations above coach-
class airline accommodations, e.g., first-class or business-class.
    (iii) First-class airline accommodations. The term ``first-class 
airline accommodations'' means the highest class of accommodations on a 
multiple-class commercial air carrier.
    (iv) Premium-class other than first-class airline accommodations. 
The term ``premium-class other than first-class airline accommodations'' 
means any class of accommodations between coach-class and first-class 
airline accommodations, e.g., business-class.
    (3) Authorization or approval of the use of premium-class airline 
accommodations--(i) Authorization or approval. Heads of agencies may 
authorize or approve the use of premium-class airline accommodations if 
the criteria in paragraph (d)(4) of this section are met for first-class 
airline accommodations or the criteria in paragraph (d)(5) of this 
section are met for premium-class other than first-class airline 
accommodations. For ease of administration, heads of agencies may 
delegate, with provisions for limited redelegation, authority to 
authorize or approve premium-class airline accommodations under 
paragraph (d) of this section, provided that appropriate guidelines in 
the form of regulations or other written instructions are furnished to 
the designee. The delegation or redelegation of authority to authorize 
or approve premium-class airline accommodations shall be held to as high 
an administrative level as practical to ensure adequate consideration 
and review of the circumstances requiring the need for premium-class 
airline accommodations.
    (ii) Requirements. Authorization for the use of premium-class 
airline accommodations shall be made in advance of the actual travel 
unless extenuating circumstances or emergency situations make advance 
authorization impossible. If advance authorization cannot be obtained, 
the employee shall obtain written approval from the agency head, or his/
her designee, at the earliest possible time.
    (4) Use of first-class airline accommodations. Circumstances 
justifying the use of first-class airline accommodations are limited to 
those listed in paragraphs (d)(4) (i) through (iii) of this section.
    (i) No other reasonably available accommodations. The use of first-
class airline accommodations may be authorized or approved when neither 
coach-class airline accommodations nor premium-class other than first-
class airline accommodations are reasonably available. For purposes of 
this paragraph (d)(4)(i), ``reasonably available'' means a class of 
accommodations, other than first-class airline accommodations, that is 
available on an airline and that is scheduled to leave within 24 hours 
of the employee's proposed departure time, or scheduled to arrive within 
24 hours of the employee's proposed arrival time. ``Reasonably 
available'' does not include any accommodations with a scheduled arrival 
time that is later than the employee's required reporting time at the 
duty site, or with a scheduled departure time that is earlier than the 
time the employee is scheduled to complete duty.
    (ii) Travel by an employee with a disability. The use of first-class 
airline accommodations may be authorized or approved when it is 
necessary to accommodate an employee's disability or other physical 
impairment, and the employee's condition is substantiated in writing by 
competent medical authority. The use of first-class airline 
accommodations also may be authorized for an attendant, who is 
authorized under Sec. 301-9.2(c)(1) of this chapter to accompany the 
employee, when the employee is authorized use of first-

[[Page 27]]

class accommodations and requires the attendant's services en route.
    (iii) Security reasons. The use of first-class airline 
accommodations may be authorized or approved when exceptional security 
circumstances require such travel. Exceptional security circumstances 
include, but are not limited to:
    (A) Travel by an employee whose use of a class of accommodations 
other than first-class would endanger the employee's life or Government 
property;
    (B) Travel by agents who are in charge of protective details and who 
are accompanying individuals authorized to use first-class 
accommodations; and
    (C) Travel by couriers and control officers who are accompanying 
controlled pouches or packages.
    (5) Use of premium-class other than first-class accommodations. 
Circumstances justifying the use of premium-class other than first-class 
airline accommodations are limited to those listed in paragraphs (d)(5) 
(i) through (ix) of this section.
    (i) Coach-class accommodations not available. The use of premium-
class other than first-class airline accommodations may be authorized or 
approved when regularly scheduled flights between the authorized origin 
and destination points (including connection points) provide only 
premium-class accommodations, and the employee certifies this 
circumstance on the travel voucher.
    (ii) No space available in coach-class accommodations. The use of 
premium-class other than first-class airline accommodations may be 
authorized or approved when space is not available in coach-class 
airline accommodations on any scheduled flight in time to accomplish the 
purpose of the official travel, which is so urgent that it cannot be 
postponed.
    (iii) Travel by an employee with a disability. The use of premium-
class other than first-class airline accommodations may be authorized or 
approved when necessary to accommodate an employee's disability or other 
physical impairment, and the employee's condition is substantiated in 
writing by competent medical authority. The use of premium-class other 
than first-class airline accommodations also may be authorized for an 
attendant, who is authorized under Sec. 301-9.2(c)(1) of this chapter to 
accompany the employee, when the employee is authorized use of premium-
class other than first-class airline accommodations and requires the 
attendant's services en route.
    (iv) Security purposes or exceptional circumstances. The use of 
premium-class other than first-class airline accommodations may be 
authorized or approved when such accommodations are required for 
security purposes or because exceptional circumstances, as determined by 
the agency head (or his/her designee), make their use essential to the 
successful performance of the agency's mission.
    (v) Inadequate foreign carrier coach-class accommodations. The use 
of premium-class other than first-class airline accommodations may be 
authorized or approved when coach-class airline accommodations on 
foreign carriers do not provide adequate sanitation or health standards, 
and the use of foreign flag air carrier service is approved in 
accordance with the Fly America Act (see Sec. 301-3.6 of this part for 
rules governing the use of U.S. flag carriers).
    (vi) Overall cost savings. The use of premium-class other than 
first-class airline accommodations may be authorized or approved when 
such accommodations would result in an overall savings to the Government 
based on economic considerations, such as the avoidance of additional 
subsistence costs, overtime, or lost productive time that would be 
incurred while awaiting availability of coach-class accommodations.
    (vii) Use of frequent traveler benefits. The use of premium-class 
other than first-class airline accommodations may be authorized or 
approved when obtained as an accommodations upgrade through the 
redemption of frequent traveler benefits.
    (viii) Acceptance of payment from a non-Federal source. The use of 
premium-class other than first-class airline accommodations may be 
authorized or approved when the employee's transportation is paid in 
full through agency acceptance of payment from a non-Federal source in 
accordance with

[[Page 28]]

part 304-1 of chapter 304 of this subtitle.
    (ix) Travel in excess of 14 hours. The use of premium-class other 
than first-class airline accommodations may be authorized or approved 
when travel is direct between authorized origin and destination points 
which are separated by several time zones, and either the origin or 
destination point is outside the continental United States (CONUS), and 
the scheduled flight time (including stopovers) is in excess of 14 
hours. When this authority is exercised, an employee shall not be 
eligible for a rest stop en route or a rest period upon arrival at the 
duty site under Sec. 301-7.11 of this chapter.
    (e) Agency reporting requirements for first-class travel. Each 
agency shall submit to the General Services Administration (GSA), no 
later than 60 days after the end of each fiscal year, a report of all 
first-class travel authorized by the agency during the fiscal year. This 
report has been assigned Interagency Report Control No. 0411-GSA-AN. The 
rules in paragraph (e) (1) through (4) of this section govern data 
collection, submission requirements, reporting procedures, and 
exceptions.
    (1) Data collection. Each agency shall collect the following data 
for each instance an employee uses first-class accommodations that are 
authorized under paragraph (b), (c), or (d) of this section:
    (i) Mode of travel (i.e., airline, steamer, or train);
    (ii) Name of traveler;
    (iii) Origin and destination points;
    (iv) Beginning date of travel;
    (v) Purpose of travel (i.e., site visit, information meeting, 
training attendance, speech or presentation, conference attendance, 
relocation, entitlement travel, special mission travel, emergency 
travel, or other travel purposes);
    (vi) Circumstances justifying use of first-class accommodations 
(i.e., no other reasonably available accommodations, travel by an 
employee with a disability, security reasons, or inadequate foreign 
coach-class train accommodations);
    (vii) Actual first-class accommodations fare; and
    (viii) Coach-class accommodations fare (or in the case of steamers, 
lowest-class steamer accommodations fare) for the actual route used.
    (2) Submission requirements. Each agency shall submit to GSA a cover 
letter with the agency name, the name of a person to contact for further 
information, and a phone number where the contact person may be reached. 
The cover letter also shall state the total number of records reported, 
the total actual cost of first-class accommodations reported, and the 
total cost of alternative coach-class accommodations based on the actual 
route used. Agencies must submit an IBM MS-DOS compatible floppy disk 
(either 3\1/2\'' or 5\1/4\'') with an ASCII file containing the first-
class accommodations use records in the following data format:
    (i) The first field in each record will be the ``mode of travel'' 
field containing one (1) numeric character corresponding to the mode of 
travel. Use the following codes in the mode of travel field:


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Mode of travel                           Code
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Airplane..........................................................     0
Ship..............................................................     1
Train.............................................................     2
------------------------------------------------------------------------



    (ii) The second field in each record will be the ``name of 
traveler'' field with forty-five (45) available alphanumeric character 
spaces containing the name of the traveler for whom first-class 
accommodations were authorized and used. Enter each record in upper case 
letters starting with the last name, followed by the first name, and the 
middle initial. Include a comma after the last name, but do not include 
the period after the middle initial (e.g., DOE, JOHN A).
    (iii) The third field in each record will be the ``origin point'' 
field with thirty-five (35) available alphanumeric character spaces 
containing the origin city and state (or country of origin for travel 
outside the United States). Enter the record in upper case letters. Use 
standard two (2) letter state abbreviations, but enter the full name of 
the country, if other than the United States, to the extent the field 
size will

[[Page 29]]

accommodate the full name (e.g., CHICAGO, IL; SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO; or 
PARIS, FRANCE).
    (iv) The fourth field in each record will be the ``destination 
point'' field with thirty-five (35) available alphanumeric character 
spaces containing the destination city and state (or destination country 
for travel outside the United States). Enter the record in upper case 
letters. Use standard two (2) letter state abbreviations, but enter the 
full name of the destination country, if other than the United States, 
to the extent the field size will accommodate the full name.
    (v) The fifth field in each record will be the ``beginning date of 
travel'' field with six (6) numeric characters containing the date of 
first-class travel. The first two characters identify the month (enter 0 
in the first space for single digit months, e.g., 01 for January); the 
second two characters identify the day of the month (enter 0 in the 
first space for single digit days); and the final two characters 
identify the last two digits of the calendar year (e.g., 060193; 091163; 
or 123189).
    (vi) The sixth field in each record will be the ``purpose of 
travel'' field containing one (1) numeric character corresponding to the 
purpose of the travel. Use the following codes in the purpose of travel 
field:


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Purpose of travel                         Code
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Site visit........................................................     0
Information meeting...............................................     1
Training attendance...............................................     2
Speech or presentation............................................     3
Conference attendance.............................................     4
Relocation........................................................     5
Entitlement travel................................................     6
Special mission travel............................................     7
Emergency travel..................................................     8
Other travel purposes.............................................     9
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    (vii) The seventh field in each record will be the ``circumstances 
justifying use of first-class accommodations'' field containing one (1) 
numeric character corresponding to the circumstances that justified the 
use of first-class accommodations. Use the following codes in the 
circumstances justifying use of first-class accommodations field:


------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Circumstances justifying use of first-class accommodations     Code
------------------------------------------------------------------------
No other reasonably available accommodations......................     0
Disability........................................................     1
Security..........................................................     2
Inadequate foreign coach-class train accommodations...............     3
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    (viii) The eighth field in each record will be the ``actual first-
class accommodations fare'' field with four (4) numeric characters 
containing the actual cost of the first-class accommodations fare 
expressed in whole dollar amounts (truncate amounts less than a dollar 
from the record and enter the amount without commas or dollar signs).
    (ix) The ninth field in each record will be the ``coach-class 
accommodations fare for the actual route used'' field with four (4) 
numeric characters containing a representative coach-class 
accommodations fare (or in the case of steamers, the lowest-class 
accommodations fare) for the actual route used expressed in whole dollar 
amounts (truncate amounts less than a dollar from the record and enter 
the amount without commas or dollar signs). The coach-class 
accommodations fare is the fare that would have been paid if the 
employee had traveled the same route using coach-class accommodations.
    (3) Reporting procedures. Agencies shall submit the reports (floppy 
disk with cover letter) to the General Services Administration, 
Transportation Management Division (FBX), Washington, DC 20406. The 
reports must be submitted no later than 60 days after the end of the 
fiscal year in which the first-class travel began.
    (4) Exceptions. To the extent that information is protected from 
disclosure by statute or Executive Order, an agency is not required to 
furnish data otherwise required to be reported. Information that may be 
disclosed shall be submitted to GSA. When specific information required 
in paragraph (e)(1) of this section is protected from public disclosure, 
an agency shall submit in its cover letter the aggregate information 
listed in paragraphs (e)(4) (i) through (iii) of this section unless the 
aggregate information also is protected from public disclosure.
    (i) Aggregate number of authorized first-class trips that are 
protected from disclosure.

[[Page 30]]

    (ii) Aggregate total of actual first-class accommodations fares 
paid.
    (iii) Aggregate total of coach-class accommodations fares for the 
actual route used.

[FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58236, Oct. 29, 1993; 58 FR 60390, Nov. 16, 1993, 
as amended by FTR Amdt. 37, 59 FR 27488, May 27, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 301-3.4  Special fares.

    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) Reduced rates--(1) Use of special lower fares. (i) Through-
fares, special fares, commutation fares, excursion fares, and reduced-
rate round-trip fares shall be used for official travel when it can be 
determined before the start of a trip that this type of service is 
practical and economical to the Government. Round-trip tickets for 
special lower fares which are restricted or have specific eligibility 
requirements shall be secured only when, on the basis of the journey as 
planned, it is known or can be reasonably anticipated that these tickets 
will be used. The use of special lower fares under these provisions does 
not take precedence over the mandatory use of contract air fares between 
selected city-pairs as prescribed in paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this 
section.
    (ii) For the use of contract air carriers for official travel 
between certain cities/airports, all agencies, except DOD, shall follow 
the policies, procedures, and requirements provided in part 301-15, 
subpart B. DOD must follow procedures established in the Defense Traffic 
Management Regulation, AR 55-355/NAVSUPINST 4600.70/AFR 75-2/MCO 
P4600.14B/DLAR 4500.3.
    (2) Reduced group or charter fares offered by travel agents. (i) 
Reduced fares for group or charter arrangements available only through 
travel agents may be used by individuals or a group of employees 
provided an administrative determination has been made by the agency on 
a case-by-case basis before the travel that use of the reduced group or 
charter fares will result in a monetary savings to the Government and 
will not interfere with the conduct of official business. In such 
instances, if payment for transportation cannot be made to a carrier 
with a Government transportation request but must be made to the travel 
agent, the traveler shall pay for the transportation from his/her own 
funds or from a travel advance (see part 301-10) and shall obtain a 
receipt (when required under Sec. 301-11.3(c)) for the cost of the 
transportation necessary in the performance of offical business which 
shall accompany his/her voucher along with a copy of the required 
administrative determination. Reimbursement shall not exceed the cost of 
accommodations authorized under Sec. 301-3.3.
    (ii) The infrequent traveler, unaware of the general prohibition 
against the use of travel agents, who inadvertently purchases 
transportation with personal funds from a travel agent without the 
required advance administrative approval, may be granted an exception to 
the preclusive provisions on a one-time basis and may be paid for the 
travel costs incurred not to exceed the cost which would have been 
properly chargeable to the Government if the transportation service had 
been purchased directly from the carrier. In such cases, the traveler 
will be advised that recurrence of such use of travel agents will result 
in denial of reimbursement unless it can be demonstrated that the 
traveler had no alternative.
    (c) Unequal fares available. Except as provided in part 301-15, 
subpart B, when common carriers furnish the same method of travel at 
different fares between the same points for the same type of 
accommodations, the lowest cost service shall be used unless use of a 
higher cost service is administratively determined to be more 
advantageous to the Government. (See Sec. 301-2.2(c).)

[54 FR 20272, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 9, 55 FR 10770, Mar. 
23, 1990; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 50, 61 FR 
55577, Oct. 28, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-3.5  Unused, downgraded, canceled or oversold transportation services.

    (a) Unused or downgraded tickets or canceled reservations. Travelers 
are required to follow the guidelines in this paragraph on unused 
passenger transportation services and accommodations:

[[Page 31]]

    (1) When a traveler knows that reservations for transportation and/
or accommodations will not be used, he/she must cancel the reservations, 
either personally or through the appropriate office handling agency 
travel arrangements, within the time limits specified by the carrier. 
Similarly, where the transportation furnished is different, or of a 
lesser value than that authorized on the ticket, or where a journey is 
terminated short of the destination specified on the transportation 
request, the Government is due a refund. The traveler shall report these 
facts to the appropriate agency office under procedures prescribed by 
the agency concerned. All adjustments in connection with unfurnished or 
unused passenger transportation must be promptly reported to prevent 
losses to the Government. Failure of travelers to follow these 
procedures may subject them to liability for any resulting losses.
    (2) As provided in 41 CFR 101-41.209-2, travelers are not authorized 
to receive refunds, credits, or any other negotiable documents from 
carriers for unfurnished services or unused tickets (or portions 
thereof) issued in exchange for a Government transportation request. 
Instead, the traveler should request a receipt or ticket refund 
application or other written acknowledgement of fare adjustment from the 
carrier and furnish the carrier a ``bill charges to'' address. All 
unused tickets (including portions thereof), coupons, exchange orders, 
refund receipts or applications, notices of fare adjustments, etc., and 
the factual information relating to the unused passenger transportation 
must be attached to or entered on the travel voucher. In any case where 
itineraries are changed or trips are canceled after tickets have been 
issued to the traveler, a statement shall be entered on the travel 
voucher, and initialed by the traveler, that all tickets have been 
either used for official purposes or all unused tickets, or portions 
thereof, have been properly accounted for and attached to the voucher. 
(See also Secs. 301-1.103(a) and 301-11.5(c)(1).)
    (b) Oversold reserved accommodations (denied boarding). Tariff 
provisions of certain scheduled air carriers require the payment of 
liquidated damages in certain situations if the carrier fails to provide 
confirmed reserved space. When payment of liquidated damages results 
from travel on official business, these penalty payments are due the 
Government and not the traveler. Any traveler who has been denied 
confirmed reserved space shall ensure that the carrier shows the 
``Treasurer of the United States'' as payee on the compensation check 
and shall forward the payment to the appropriate agency official. (See 
41 CFR 101-41.209-4.) These payments shall be deposited by the agency in 
accordance with Department of Treasury requirements and credited to 
miscellaneous receipt account 1699 ``Miscellaneous Dividends and 
Earnings Not Otherwise Classified.'' (See also Sec. 301-1.103 and 41 CFR 
101-25.103-2.)
    (c) Voluntary vacating of reserved airline accommodations. Airlines 
are required to ask for volunteers to give up their reserved seats 
before the airline denies boarding to any passenger with a reservation. 
Airlines are free to determine the amount to be paid to the volunteer. 
Employees who voluntarily give up their seats may retain these payments 
only under the following conditions. Employees should not voluntarily 
give up their seats if it will interfere with the performance of 
official duties. If an employee voluntarily gives up his/her reserved 
seat and, as a result, incurs additional travel expenses beyond those 
which he/she would have normally incurred, these additional expenses 
must be offset against the payment received by the employee. If the 
employee's travel is delayed during official duty hours, the employee 
would be charged annual leave for the additional hours.
    (d) Agency responsibilities. Each agency shall prescribe procedures 
for use by travelers when submitting documentation and statements 
relating to unused or downgraded passenger transportation services. 
Included in these procedures will be instructions for submitting 
payments received from carriers for denied confirmed reserved space. 
Agencies shall also provide the traveler with a ``bill charges to'' 
address by attaching a copy of the GTR, or some other document 
containing this information, to either the travel authorization or the 
ticket to facilitate the carrier refund procedures as required by 41

[[Page 32]]

CFR 101-41.210-1. Necessary administrative arrangements shall be 
established for an appropriate review of travel vouchers and attached 
documentation in order to identify any unused tickets, coupons, etc., or 
other evidence of refund due the Government. To prevent losses to the 
Government these documents must be promptly identified and processed 
under the unused ticket refund procedures prescribed in 41 CFR 101-
41.210. (See paragraph (a) of this section for required traveler's 
statement intended to highlight and facilitate control of unused 
tickets.)

[54 FR 20272, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23655, May 
23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-3.6  Use of United States flag carriers.

    (a) Travel by United States flag ships. Section 901 of the Merchant 
Marine Act of 1936 (46 U.S.C. 1241(a)) provides:

    Any officer or employee of the United States traveling on official 
business overseas or to or from any of the possessions of the United 
States shall travel and transport his/her personal effects on ships 
registered under the laws of the United States where such ships are 
available unless the necessity of the mission requires the use of a ship 
under a foreign flag: Provided, That the Comptroller General of the 
United States shall not credit any allowance for travel or shipping 
expenses incurred on a foreign ship in the absence of satisfactory proof 
of the necessity therefor.

    (b) Use of United States flag air carriers--(1) Definitions. As used 
in this section, the following definitions apply:
    (i) The Fly America Act. The ``Fly America Act'' refers to 
provisions enacted by section 5 of the International Air Transportation 
Fair Competitive Practices Act of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-623, January 3, 
1975), 49 U.S.C. App. 1517, as amended by section 21 of the 
International Air Transportation Competition Act of 1979 (Pub. L. 96-
192, February 15, 1980), 94 Stat. 43.
    (ii) U.S. flag air carrier. The term ``U.S. flag air carrier'' means 
an air carrier holding a certificate under section 401 of the Federal 
Aviation Act of 1958 (49 U.S.C. App. 1371). Foreign air carriers 
operating under permits are excluded.
    (iii) United States. For purposes of the Fly America Act, ``United 
States'' means the 50 States, the District of Columbia, and the 
territories and possessions of the United States (49 U.S.C. App. 
1301(41)).
    (iv) Gateway airport in the United States. A ``gateway airport in 
the United States'' means the last airport in the United States from 
which the traveler's flight departs, or the first airport in the United 
States at which the traveler's flight arrives.
    (v) Gateway airport abroad. A ``gateway airport abroad'' means the 
airport abroad from which the traveler last embarks en route to the 
United States or at which the traveler first debarks incident to travel 
from the United States.
    (2) General requirements of the Fly America Act. The Fly America 
Act, 49 U.S.C. App. 1517, as implemented by the Comptroller General's 
guidelines, Decision B-138942, March 31, 1981, requires Federal 
employees and their dependents, consultants, contractors, grantees, and 
others performing United States Government financed foreign air travel 
to travel by U.S. flag air carriers:
    (i) Unless travel by foreign air carrier is a matter of necessity as 
defined in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, or
    (ii) When U.S. flag air carrier service is available within the 
guidelines in paragraphs (b) (4) and (5) of this section.
    (3) Necessity for use of foreign air carrier service. Use of foreign 
air carrier service may be deemed necessary if a U.S. flag air carrier 
otherwise available cannot provide the air transportation needed, or use 
of U.S. flag air carrier service will not accomplish the agency's 
mission.
    (4) Availability of U.S. flag air carrier service--(i) General. U.S. 
flag air carrier service is available even though:
    (A) Comparable or a different kind of service can be provided at 
less cost by a foreign air carrier;
    (B) Foreign air carrier service is preferred by or is more 
convenient for the agency or the traveler; or
    (C) Service by a foreign air carrier can be paid for in excess 
foreign currency, unless U.S. flag air carriers decline to accept excess 
or near excess

[[Page 33]]

foreign currencies for transportation payable only out of those monies. 
(See also paragraph (b)(5)(iv) of this section.)
    (ii) Scheduling principles. In determining availability of U.S. flag 
air carrier service, the following scheduling principles should be 
followed unless their application results in the last or first leg of 
travel to and from the United States being performed by foreign air 
carrier:
    (A) U.S. flag air carrier service available at point of origin 
should be used to destination or, in the absence of direct or through 
service, to the farthest interchange point on a usually traveled route;
    (B) Where an origin or interchange point is not served by U.S. flag 
air carrier, foreign air carrier service should be used only to the 
nearest interchange point on a usually traveled route to connect with 
U.S. flag air carrier service; or
    (C) Where a U.S. flag air carrier involuntarily reroutes the 
traveler via a foreign carrier, the foreign air carrier may be used 
notwithstanding the availability of alternative U.S. flag air carrier 
service.
    (5) Guidelines for determining unavailability of U.S. flag air 
carrier service--(i) Travel to and from the United States. Passenger 
service by a U.S. flag air carrier will not be considered available when 
the travel is between a gateway airport in the United States and a 
gateway airport abroad and the gateway airport abroad is:
    (A) The traveler's origin or destination airport, and the use of 
U.S. flag air carrier service would extend the time in a travel status, 
including delay at origin and accelerated arrival at destination, by at 
least 24 hours more than travel by foreign air carrier;
    (B) An interchange point, and the use of U.S. flag air carrier 
service would require the traveler to wait 6 hours or more to make 
connections at that point, or delayed departure from or accelerated 
arrival at the gateway airport in the United States would extend the 
time in a travel status by at least 6 hours more than travel by foreign 
air carrier.
    (ii) Travel between two points outside the United States. For travel 
between two points outside the United States, U.S. flag air carrier 
service will not be considered to be reasonably available:
    (A) If travel by foreign air carrier would eliminate two or more 
aircraft changes en route;
    (B) Where one of the two points abroad is the gateway airport en 
route to or from the United States, if the use of a U.S. flag air 
carrier would extend the time in a travel status by at least 6 hours 
more than travel by foreign air carrier, including accelerated arrival 
at the overseas destination or delayed departure from the overseas 
origin, as well as delay at the gateway airport or other interchange 
point abroad; or
    (C) Where the travel is not part of a trip to or from the United 
States, if the use of a U.S. flag air carrier would extend the time in a 
travel status by at least 6 hours more than traveled by foreign air 
carrier including delay at origin, delay en route and accelerated 
arrival at destination.
    (iii) Short distance travel. For all short distance travel, 
regardless of origin and destination, U.S. flag air carrier service will 
not be considered available when the elapsed travel time on a scheduled 
flight from origin to destination airport by foreign air carrier is 3 
hours or less and service by U.S. flag air carrier would involve twice 
the travel time.
    (iv) Travel financed solely with excess foreign currencies. U.S. 
flag air carriers render themselves unavailable by declining to accept 
payment in foreign currencies for transportation services required by 
certain programs or activities of the Government which, under 
legislative authority, are financed solely with excess foreign 
currencies which may not be converted to U.S. dollars. In these 
instances, and notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (b)(4)(i)(C) 
of this section, foreign flag air carriers that will accept the required 
foreign currency may be used to the extent necessary to accomplish the 
mission of the particular program or activity. The statement of 
justification required under paragraph (c)(3) of this section must 
indicate that the transportation service needed can be paid for only in 
excess foreign currencies and that otherwise available U.S. flag

[[Page 34]]

air carriers declined to accept payment in the foreign currencies.
    (c) Use of foreign flag air carriers--(1) Authorization or approval. 
Expenditures for commercial foreign air transportation on foreign air 
carrier(s) will be disallowed unless there is attached to the 
appropriate voucher a certificate or memorandum adequately explaining 
why service by U.S. flag air carrier(s) is not available, or why it was 
necessary to use a foreign air carrier. The use of foreign flag air 
carriers may be authorized or approved only when U.S. flag air carrier 
service is not available as determined under the guidelines in paragraph 
(b) of this section, or when foreign air carriers are used under the 
reciprocal terms of an appropriate bilateral or multilateral agreement 
as described in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, or when use of foreign 
carriers is necessary under paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (2) Air transport agreements. Nothing in the guidelines contained in 
paragraph (b) of this section shall preclude and no penalty shall attend 
the use of a foreign air carrier which provides transportation under an 
air transport agreement between the United States and a foreign 
government, the terms of which are consistent with the international 
aviation policy goals set forth at 49 U.S.C. App. 1502(b) and provide 
reciprocal rights and benefits.
    (3) Justification statement. A statement executed by the traveler or 
agency justifying the use of a foreign flag air carrier for any part of 
foreign travel must be entered on or attached to the travel voucher, 
transportation request, or other payment document. Each request for a 
change in route or schedule which involves the use of a foreign flag air 
carrier must be accompanied by a statement justifying such use. The 
following is provided as a guide for preparing the required 
justification statement:

    I certify that it (is) (was) necessary for
_______________________________________________________________________
(name of traveler or agency)

to use
_______________________________________________________________________
(name of foreign flag vessel(s) or foreign flag air carrier(s))

_______________________________________________________________________
(flight identification number)

or to transport_________________________________________________________
(personal effects) (freight)

between_________________________________________________________________
and_____________________________________________________________________
en route from___________________________________________________________
to______________________________________________________________________
on
_______________________________________________________________________
(date)

for the following reasons:______________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________

(date)

_______________________________________________________________________
(Signature of traveler or authorizing officer)

_______________________________________________________________________
(Title or position)

_______________________________________________________________________
(Organization)

    (4) Employee liability for disallowed expenditures. Where the travel 
is by indirect route or the traveler otherwise fails to use available 
U.S. flag air carrier service, the amount to be disallowed against the 
traveler is based on the loss of revenues suffered by U.S. flag air 
carriers as determined under the following formula set forth and more 
fully explained in 56 Comp. Gen. 209 (1977):

                                                                        
   Sum of certificated carrier                                          
   segment mileage, authorized                                          
---------------------------------      x            Fare payable by     
   Sum of all segment mileage,                         Government       
           authorized                                                   
      Minus                                                             


                                                                        
  Sum of certificated carrier                                           
   segment mileage, traveled                                            
--------------------------------      x            Through fare paid    
  Sum of all segment mileage,                                           
            traveled                                                    
                                                                        


[54 FR 20272, May 10, 1989; 54 FR 23563, June 1, 1989, as amended by FTR 
Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41526, Oct. 12, 1990; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, June 
26, 1992]

[[Page 35]]


<R03>
PART 301-4--REIMBURSEMENT FOR USE OF PRIVATELY OWNED CONVEYANCES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301-4.1  Basic rules.
301-4.2  When use of a privately owned conveyance is advantageous to the 
          Government.
301-4.3  Use of a privately owned conveyance instead of common carrier 
          transportation.
301-4.4  Use of a privately owned conveyance instead of a Government-
          furnished automobile.
301-4.5  More than one person in conveyance.
301-4.6  Actual expense basis.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5701-5709.

    Source: 54 FR 20276, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 301-4.1  Basic rules.

    (a) Mileage payments. When employees and others rendering service to 
the Government use privately owned motor vehicles or airplanes in the 
conduct of official business within or outside their designated posts of 
duty or places of service and such use is authorized or approved as 
advantageous to the Government or as an authorized or approved exercise 
of the employee's preference, payment shall be made on a mileage basis 
unless payment on an actual expense basis is specifically authorized by 
law.
    (b) Distance measurements--(1) Automobile and motorcycle travel. 
When transportation is authorized or approved by privately owned 
motorcycles or automobiles, distances between points traveled shall be 
as shown in standard highway mileage guides or actual miles driven as 
determined from odometer readings. (Actual odometer readings need not be 
shown on the travel voucher.) Any substantial deviations from distances 
shown in the standard highway mileage guides shall be explained. The 
mileage rate as authorized or approved may be paid from whatever point 
the employee or other person rendering service to the Government begins 
his/her journey.
    (2) Airplane travel. The air mileage between the origin and 
destination airports, as determined from airways charts issued by the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce, 
shall be reported on the reimbursement voucher and shall be used in 
computing payment for the use of a privately owned airplane. If a detour 
was necessary because of adverse weather, mechanical difficulty, or 
other unusual conditions, the additional air mileage may be included in 
the mileage reported on the reimbursement voucher and, if included, it 
must be explained. When an official requirement for deviation from 
direct route travel is such that airway mileage charts are not adequate 
to determine mileage, the formula of flight time multiplied by cruising 
speed of the airplane may be the basis for mileage determinations.
    (c) Other allowable costs. Reimbursement for parking fees; ferry 
fees; bridge, road, and tunnel fees; and airplane parking, landing, and 
tiedown fees shall be allowed in addition to the mileage allowance 
unless the travel orders or other administrative determinations restrict 
such allowance.


<R05>
Sec. 301-4.2  When use of a privately owned conveyance is advantageous to the Government.

    (a) Authorized mileage reimbursement rates. When the use of a 
privately owned conveyance is authorized or approved as advantageous to 
the Government for the performance of official travel, either within or 
outside the United States, as provided in Sec. 301-2.2(d)(3) of this 
chapter, reimbursement to the traveler shall be at the mileage rates 
prescribed in this paragraph.

    (1) For use of a privately owned automobile: 31 cents per mile.
    (2) For use of a privately owned airplane: 85 cents per mile
    (3) For use of a privately owned motorcycle: 25 cents per mile.
    (b) Special rule when permanent duty travel is involved. The 
regulations contained in chapter 302 of this title shall apply when 
privately owned automobiles are used in connection with employees' 
permanent changes of station, when the appointees or student trainees 
described therein travel to their first permanent duty stations, or when 
employees return from posts of duty outside the continental United 
States to places of actual residence for separation.

[[Page 36]]

    (c) To and from common carrier terminals and office--(1) Round trip 
instead of taxicab to carrier terminals. Instead of using a taxicab 
under Sec. 301-2.3(c), payment on a mileage basis at the rate of 31 
cents per mile and other allowable costs as set forth in Sec. 301-4.1(c) 
shall be allowed for the round-trip mileage of a privately owned 
automobile used by an employee going from either the employee's home or 
place of business to a terminal or from a terminal to either the 
employee's home or place of business. However, the amount of 
reimbursement for the round trip shall not in either instance exceed the 
taxicab fare, including tip, allowable under Sec. 301-2.3(c) for a one-
way trip between the applicable points.
    (2) Round trip instead of taxicab between residence and office on 
day of travel. Instead of using a taxicab under Sec. 301-2.3(d) (in 
connection with official travel requiring at least one night's lodging), 
payment on a mileage basis at the rate of 31 cents per mile and other 
allowable costs as set forth in Sec. 301-4.1(c) shall be allowed for 
round-trip mileage of a privately owned automobile used by an employee 
going from the employee's residence to the employee's place of business 
or returning from place of business to residence on a day travel is 
performed. However, the amount of reimbursement for the round trip shall 
not exceed the taxicab fare, including tip, allowable under Sec. 301-
2.3(d) for a one-way trip between the points involved.
    (3) Privately owned conveyance used to transport other employees 
between residence, office, and common carrier terminals. Payment under 
paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this section may be made without the 
taxicab fare limitation when the privately owned conveyance used by the 
employee for official travel is also used to pick up and transport one 
or more additional employees traveling between home, office, and common 
carrier terminals incident to a temporary duty assignment. Employee 
participation under this provision is voluntary. The names of the 
additional employees and their employing offices/agencies should be 
stated on the travel voucher in accordance with Sec. 301-4.5.
    (4) Parking when automobile is left at terminal. The fee for parking 
an automobile at a common carrier terminal or other parking area while 
the traveler is away from his/her official station shall be allowed only 
to the extent that the fee plus the allowable reimbursement to and from 
the terminal or other parking area does not exceed the estimated cost 
for use of a taxicab to and from the terminal under the provisions of 
Sec. 301-2.3(c).

[54 FR 20276, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 18, 56 FR 28824, 
June 25, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 42, 
59 FR 66626, Dec. 27, 1994; FTR Amdt. 48, 61 FR 25802, May 23, 1996; FTR 
Amdt. 54, 61 FR 68159, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-4.3  Use of a privately owned conveyance instead of common carrier transportation.

    Whenever a privately owned conveyance is used for official purposes 
as a matter of personal preference instead of common carrier 
transportation under Sec. 301-2.2(d), payment for such travel shall be 
made on the basis of the actual travel performed, computed under 
Sec. 301-4.1 at the mileage rate prescribed in Sec. 301-4.2(a) plus the 
per diem allowable for the actual travel. The total allowable shall be 
limited to the total constructive cost of appropriate common carrier 
transportation including constructive per diem by that method of 
transportation. Constructive cost of transportation and per diem by 
common carrier shall be determined under the following rules:
    (a) Mode of travel to be used for comparison--(1) Airplane. The 
mileage payment shall not exceed the constructive cost of coach-class 
airline accommodations, as defined in Sec. 301-3.3(d)(2)(i) of this 
chapter, on a commercial air carrier. If travel is between a city/
airport pair for which air carrier service is provided under contract 
with GSA, the constructive cost is limited to the appropriate contract 
air fare. If no air carrier is under contract with GSA to provide 
service between a particular city/airport pair, the constructive cost is 
limited to the lowest unrestricted coach-class fare provided by a 
commercial air carrier serving that city/airport pair. For purposes of 
this provision, coach-class accommodations are considered to be provided 
by a carrier when they are scheduled on flights

[[Page 37]]

serving origin and destination points, regardless of whether space would 
actually have been available had the traveler used air transportation 
for the official travel.
    (2) Train. When the air accommodations described in paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section are not provided between the origin and destination 
points, the mileage payment shall be limited to the constructive cost of 
coach-class train accommodations for the travel performed. The 
constructive cost comparison also may be made with rail transportation, 
even though commercial air accommodations are provided between the city/
airport pair, when an administrative determination is made that such 
comparison, including related per diem, is more economical, and the 
travel order or other administrative directive so provides. The 
constructive cost comparison may be limited to the cost of extra fare 
service as defined in Sec. 301-3.3(b)(2)(iv) of this chapter only when 
extra fare service has been authorized as advantageous to the 
Government.
    (3) Bus. When neither air nor rail accommodations are provided, the 
mileage payment shall be limited to the constructive cost of bus 
transportation.
    (b) Transportation costs to be considered in addition to fares. In 
determining the constructive common carrier cost, there shall also be 
included the usual transportation costs to and from the common carrier 
terminals. In addition, the cost of excess baggage shall be included 
when it would have been allowed had the traveler used the carrier upon 
which the constructive transportation costs are determined, provided the 
traveler certifies as to the weight of the baggage or presents other 
acceptable evidence of its weight.
    (c) Per diem allowance. The constructive per diem shall be the 
amount which would have been allowable if the traveler had used the 
carrier upon which the constructive transportation costs are determined.
    (d) Use of actual and reasonable schedules. In making the foregoing 
constructive cost comparisons of transportation, scheduled departure and 
arrivals of planes, trains, and buses at unreasonable hours shall be 
disregarded. (For this purpose, ``unreasonable hours'' means those which 
would unduly inconvenience the traveler or adversely affect his/her 
safety, or which would result in unduly increasing the constructive per 
diem.)

[54 FR 20276, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 3, 54 FR 47524, Nov. 
15, 1989; FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58240, Oct. 29, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 301-4.4  Use of a privately owned conveyance instead of a Government-furnished automobile.

    (a) Planning for use of Government-furnished automobiles. When use 
of a privately owned conveyance is authorized or approved under 
Sec. 301-2.2(e) even though use of a Government-furnished automobile 
would be more advantageous to the Government, reimbursement to the 
employee shall be limited to the cost which would be incurred for use of 
a Government-furnished automobile. The normal rate of reimbursement 
shall be that provided in paragraph (b) of this section; however, 
agencies should obtain commitments from employees who are expected to 
perform extensive automobile travel on official business whether they 
will use Government-furnished automobiles or whether they will elect to 
use privately owned conveyances. Such commitments will be for periods of 
time which warrant the making of arrangements for supply of Government-
furnished automobiles, and commitment changes shall be made in 
sufficient time in advance of their effective dates to permit 
arrangements to be made for acquisition or disposal of Government-
furnished automobiles as required. An employee who is committed to use a 
Government-furnished automobile shall not be authorized reimbursement 
for use of his/her privately owned conveyance instead of a Government-
furnished automobile; except that, if such an employee occasionally uses 
his/her privately owned conveyance when a Government-furnished 
automobile is available, mileage reimbursement limited to the cost of 
operating a Government-furnished vehicle (fixed costs excluded as 
provided in paragraph (c) of this section) may be authorized or 
approved.
    (b) Reimbursement based on Government costs. It has been determined 
that

[[Page 38]]

the average mileage cost for use of a Government-furnished automobile 
for travel in the continental United States is 23.5 cents. Therefore, 
the mileage rate for authorized use of a privately owned conveyance when 
use of a Government-furnished automobile would be most advantageous to 
the Government shall be 23.5 cents. Exceptions to the 23.5 cent 
limitation may be authorized if an agency determines that, because of 
unusual circumstances, the cost of providing a Government-furnished 
automobile would be higher than 23.5 cents. In such instances, the 
agency may allow reimbursement at such higher rate within the rate 
stated in Sec. 301-4.2(a) for advantageous use that will most nearly 
equal the cost of providing a Government-furnished automobile in those 
circumstances. In addition to mileage for the distance allowed under 
Sec. 301-4.1(b), the employee may be reimbursed for expenses authorized 
under Sec. 301-4.1(c) which would have been incurred if a Government-
furnished vehicle had been used.
    (c) Partial reimbursement when Government automobile is available. 
When an employee who is committed to using a Government-furnished 
automobile, or who because of the availability of Government-furnished 
automobiles, would not ordinarily be authorized to use a privately owned 
conveyance instead of a Government-furnished automobile, nevertheless 
requests use of a privately owned conveyance, reimbursement may be 
authorized or approved. The rate of reimbursement shall be 10.5 cents 
per mile, which is the approximate cost of operating a Government-
furnished automobile, fixed costs excluded.
    (d) Reimbursement claims. When claiming mileage at the 23.5-cent 
rate, the employee shall state on the voucher that a commitment was not 
made to use a Government-furnished automobile and that reimbursement for 
use of a privately owned automobile was not limited under paragraph (c) 
of this section.

[54 FR 20276, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 42, 59 FR 66626, 
Dec. 27, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 301-4.5  More than one person in conveyance.

    Mileage shall be payable to only one of two or more employees 
traveling together on the same trip and in the same conveyance, but no 
deduction shall be made from the mileage otherwise payable to the 
employee entitled thereto by reason of the fact that other passengers 
(whether or not Government employees) may travel with him/her and 
contribute to defraying the operating expenses. The names of employees 
and their employing agencies should be stated on the voucher. (See 
Sec. 301-11.5(d).)


<R05>
Sec. 301-4.6  Actual expense basis.

    (a) Used only when authorized by law. Reimbursement on an actual 
expense basis applies to reimbursement for use of a privately owned 
motorcycle, automobile, or airplane only where such method of 
reimbursement is authorized by law; otherwise, reimbursement is to be 
made under the provisions of Secs. 301-4.1 through 301-4.5.
    (b) Comparative cost requirement. The use of a privately owned 
conveyance on an actual expense basis, as distinguished from a mileage 
basis under Secs. 301-4.1 through 301-4.5, may be authorized or approved 
provided the aggregate of allowable expenses plus any increased 
subsistence expenses through increased travel time or less subsistence 
savings through reduced travel time, as the case may be, does not exceed 
the cost of transportation available by common carrier.
    (c) Reimbursable costs. For such travel on an actual expense basis, 
the employee shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of gasoline, 
oil, feed of horses, garage or hangar rent and stabling of horses while 
officially detained en route, and bridge, ferry, and other tolls. In 
determining the amount of increased subsistence expenses or subsistence 
savings for a given period of time, the per diem rate named in the 
travel order shall be used. Charges for repairs, depreciation, 
replacements, grease, antifreeze, towage, and similar speculative 
expenses shall not be allowed. Exemption from payment of tax on gasoline 
in States providing such

[[Page 39]]

exemption shall be claimed. The standard Federal forms shall be used for 
that purpose. When exemption is refused, receipts shall be obtained in 
duplicate. (See Secs. 301-11.3(c)(7) and 301-11.5(c)(2).)


<R03>
PART 301-5--BAGGAGE--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301-5.1  Definitions.
301-5.2  Authorization for excess baggage.
301-5.3  Payment of costs for baggage.
301-5.4  Stoppage in transit.
301-5.5  Requirement for use of least costly means of shipment.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5707

    Source: 54 FR 20279, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 301-5.1  Definitions.

    (a) Baggage. The term baggage as used in this subtitle means 
Government property and personal property of the traveler necessary for 
official travel.
    (b) Excess baggage. Baggage in excess of the weight, size, or number 
of pieces that is carried free by transportation companies shall be 
classed as excess baggage.

[54 FR 20279, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-5.2  Authorization for excess baggage.

    Where less-than-first-class accommodations are used, transportation 
of baggage up to the number of pieces or weight carried free on first-
class service shall be allowed at Government expense; in all other 
instances, excess baggage charges shall be allowed only when authorized 
or approved.


<R05>
Sec. 301-5.3  Payment of costs for baggage.

    (a) Transportation charges for excess baggage. As a general rule, 
travelers shall make each payment of domestic airline excess baggage 
charges that do not exceed $15. Where excess baggage services are 
specifically authorized, the travel order shall clearly state whether 
such charges are to be paid for in cash by the traveler or to be 
authorized on the Government transportation request. If the 
authorization for excess baggage is not included on the transportation 
request, the traveler's claim for reimbursement shall be included on the 
travel voucher.
    (b) Transfer of baggage. Necessary charges for the transfer of 
baggage shall be allowed.
    (c) Storage of baggage. Charges for the storage of baggage shall be 
allowed when it is shown that the storage was solely on account of 
official business.
    (d) Checking and handling of baggage. Charges for checking baggage 
shall be allowed. Charges or tips at transportation terminals shall be 
allowed for handling Government property carried by the traveler.


<R05>
Sec. 301-5.4  Stoppage in transit.

    Care should be taken to stop baggage that has been checked on a 
ticket beyond the point where the traveler leaves the carrier. If 
baggage cannot be intercepted or transferred and is carried through to 
original destination on the unused portion of the ticket, full 
explanation of the facts shall be made to the administrative office at 
the time the unused ticket is forwarded for redemption, or the 
explanation shall be shown on the voucher. Failure to observe this rule 
shall result in any excess cost to the Government being charged to the 
employee.


<R05>
Sec. 301-5.5  Requirement for use of least costly means of shipment.

    (a) Selection of transportation service. When the total weight of 
Government property and personal effects or other property needed by the 
traveler exceeds the baggage allowance, quantities in excess of the 
allowance shall be shipped by parcel post, where practical, or, if not 
suitable for mailing, by freight or express if any of those less costly 
means of shipment will suffice. Shipments must not be made as 
accompanied baggage or express when ordinary freight service will meet 
the official needs. Due consideration must be given to the probable cost 
of collecting or delivering the shipment and the time required for 
transmission.
    (b) Use of Government bills of lading. Express and freight shipments 
shall be made on Government bills of lading unless such handling will 
interfere with the official purposes of the trip or unless it is not 
practical. Charges on shipments made on Government bills of

[[Page 40]]

lading must not be paid by the traveler.

[54 FR 20279, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 50, 61 FR 55578, 
Oct. 28, 1996]


<R03>
PART 301-6--COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301-6.1  Authorization.
301-6.2  Type of service used.
301-6.3  Written messages.
301-6.4  Official communications.
301-6.5  [Reserved].
301-6.6  Charges for telegraph, cable, and radio services.
301-6.7  Priority of official messages.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5707

    Source: 54 FR 20279, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 301-6.1  Authorization.

    When necessary, telephone, teletype, telegraph, cable, and radio 
service may be used on official business.


<R05>
Sec. 301-6.2  Type of service used.

    (a) Government equipment. Whenever possible, official long distance 
telephone calls and other communications services shall be through the 
use of Government-owned and -leased equipment.
    (b) Use of commercial services. If Government services are not 
available, the least expensive practicable type and class of commercial 
service shall be used.


<R05>
Sec. 301-6.3  Written messages.

    When necessary, written messages may be used while on official 
business. However, care shall be exercised in preparing messages to 
provide only those words, figures, and punctuation necessary to the 
meaning of the message.


<R05>
Sec. 301-6.4  Official communications.

    (a) Local calls. Charges for local telephone calls on official 
business shall be allowed as a transportation expense. (See Sec. 301-
11.5(a)(1) regarding entry of such calls on travel vouchers as a 
transportation expense.)
    (b) Reservation of accommodations. Charges for commercial 
communication services when necessary for reserving airplane, train, or 
other transportation accommodations for official business are 
transportation expenses and may be allowed when supported by a 
satisfactory explanation.
    (c) Use of Government telephone systems during official travel. The 
Federal Telecommunications System (FTS) intercity network and other 
Government-provided long distance telephone services are to be used only 
to conduct official business; i.e., if the call is necessary in the 
interest of the Government. These networks are to be used for placement 
of calls instead of the commercial toll network to the maximum extent 
practicable. (See Sec. 301-6.2.) Authorization or approval of employees' 
use of the Government telephone systems (including calls over commercial 
systems which will be paid for by the Government) during official travel 
shall be in accordance with agency directives issued pursuant to the 
Federal Property Management Regulations (FPMR), 41 CFR 101-35.201.

[54 FR 20279, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, 
June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 55, 61 FR 67951, Dec. 26, 1996]
Sec. 301-6.5  [Reserved].


<R05>
Sec. 301-6.6  Charges for telegraph, cable, and radio services.

    (a) Collect service. Official telegrams, cablegrams, and radiograms 
sent to Government offices having authorized charge accounts shall be 
endorsed by the sender as ``Official Business-Collect'' unless otherwise 
directed by a designated authority. All others shall be prepaid.
    (b) Cash payment. When ``collect'' service is refused, payment of 
the amount demanded shall be made. A report of the circumstances and a 
receipted copy (when required under Sec. 301-11.3(c)) of the message 
shall be sent to the administrative office.
    (c) Words chargeable. All messages shall be subject in all respects 
to the prevailing commercial count of chargeable words. In addition, 
collect messages may include a surcharge.

[54 FR 20279, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 50, 61 FR 55578, 
Oct. 28, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-6.7  Priority of official messages.

    All Government communications by telegraph, cable, or radio shall 
have priority over all other business, except

[[Page 41]]

radio communications or signals which are given absolute priority under 
the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and shall be subject to the 
prevailing classifications, practices, and regulations applicable to the 
corresponding commercial communications. Employees sending such 
communications shall endorse thereon the words ``official business.'' 
Complaints may be filed with the Federal Communications Commission in 
accordance with section 208 of the Communications Act of 1934, as 
amended.


<R03>
PART 301-7--PER DIEM ALLOWANCES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301-7.1  General.
301-7.2  Employee and agency responsibilities.
301-7.3  Maximum per diem rates.
301-7.4  Rate adjustment requests for travel within CONUS.
301-7.5  General rules affecting entitlement to per diem.
301-7.6  Lodgings-plus per diem system.
301-7.7  Computation rules for travel of more than 10 hours, but not 
          exceeding 24 hours.
301-7.8  Computation rules for travel of more than 24 hours.
301-7.9  Lodging--location, receipt requirements, and allowable 
          expenses.
301-7.10  Deviation from lodgings-plus per diem system.
301-7.11  Rest stops when travel outside CONUS is involved.
301-7.12  Reductions in maximum per diem rates when appropriate.
301-7.13  Mixed travel reimbursements.
301-7.14  Per diem allowance computations for special situations.
301-7.15  Interruptions of per diem entitlement.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5701-5709.

    Source: FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41526, Oct. 12, 1990, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.1  General.

    This part applies worldwide (both within and outside CONUS) except 
as specifically provided in this part.
    (a) Authority. Per diem allowances shall be paid as prescribed in 
this part for official travel away from the official station (including 
travel incident to a change of official station), except when actual 
subsistence expense reimbursement is authorized or approved as provided 
in part 301-8.
    (b) Definitions. For purposes of this part, the following 
definitions apply:
    (1) Calendar day. Calendar day means the 24-hour period from one 
midnight to the next midnight. The calendar day technically begins one 
second after midnight (reflected in this part as 12:01 a.m.) and ends at 
12:00 midnight.
    (2) CONUS. CONUS refers to the continental United States, defined in 
Sec. 301-1.3(c)(6) as the 48 contiguous States and the District of 
Columbia. (See 5 U.S.C. 5701(6).)
    (3) Destination rate. Destination rate is the rate applicable to the 
next location where the employee will perform temporary duty or where 
the employee makes an en route stopover to obtain overnight lodging.
    (4) Locality rates. Locality rates are maximum per diem rates 
prescribed for specific localities.
    (5) Standard CONUS rate. Generally, the standard CONUS rate is 
prescribed for any location within CONUS that is not included in one of 
the defined localities or areas for which a specific rate is prescribed 
in appendix A. The standard CONUS rate is also prescribed for all 
locations within CONUS when permanent change of station travel is 
involved.
    (6) Per diem allowance. The per diem allowance is a daily payment 
instead of actual expenses for lodging, meals and related incidental 
expenses (see paragraph (c) of this section). The per diem allowance is 
distinguished from transportation expenses and other miscellaneous 
travel expenses as described in paragraphs (b)(6) (i) and (ii) of this 
section.
    (i) Transportation expenses. Transportation expenses include 
commercial bus, air, rail, or vessel/steamship fares and are 
reimbursable in addition to the per diem allowance. Transportation 
expenses also include local transit system and taxi fares; cost of 
commercial rental cars and other special conveyances; and mileage and 
other allowances to cover operating expenses for use of privately owned 
conveyances, including fees for parking, ferries, etc. (See parts 301-2, 
301-3, and 301-4 for governing provisions.)

[[Page 42]]

    (ii) Other miscellaneous travel expenses. Other miscellaneous travel 
expenses are those described in part 301-9 that are directly 
attributable and necessary to the travel and temporary duty as 
authorized and performed. When authorized or approved by the agency 
concerned, these expenses are reimbursable in addition to the per diem 
allowance and transportation expenses.
    (c) Types of expenses covered by per diem. The per diem allowance 
covers all charges, including taxes and service charges where 
applicable, for the following types of expenses (also referred to as 
subsistence expenses in other parts of this subtitle).
    (1) Lodging. (i) The term lodging includes expenses for overnight 
sleeping facilities; baths; personal use of the room during daytime; and 
service charges for fans, air conditioners, heaters, and fires furnished 
in rooms when such charges are not included in the room rate.
    (ii) The term lodging does not include accommodations on airplanes, 
trains, buses, or vessels. The cost of accommodations furnished aboard 
common carriers is included in the transportation cost and is not 
considered an expense covered by per diem. However, in determining the 
overall cost to the Government when authorizing the mode of 
transportation to be used (see Sec. 301-2.2), the availability of these 
accommodations shall be considered.
    (2) Meals. Expenses for breakfast, lunch, and dinner and related 
tips and taxes (specifically excluded are alcoholic beverage and 
entertainment expenses, and any expenses incurred for other persons).
    (3) Incidental expenses covered by per diem. (i) Fees and tips to 
porters, baggage carriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewards or 
stewardesses and others on vessels, and hotel servants in foreign 
countries.
    (ii) Laundry and cleaning and pressing of clothing.
    (iii) Transportation between places of lodging or business and 
places where meals are taken except as provided in Sec. 301-2.3(b).
    (iv) Telegrams and telephone calls necessary to reserve lodging 
accommodations. (See part 301-6 for allowable telegram and telephone 
expenses incurred for other purposes.)

[FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41526, Oct. 12, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 
56 FR 23655, May 23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.2  Employee and agency responsibilities.

    (a) Employee responsibility--(1) Duty to exercise care in incurring 
expenses. An employee traveling on official business is expected to 
exercise the same care in incurring expenses that a prudent person would 
exercise if traveling on personal business and expending personal funds. 
Excess costs, circuitous routes, delays, or luxury accommodations and 
services unnecessary or unjustified in the performance of official 
business are not acceptable under this standard. Employees will be 
responsible for excess costs and any additional expenses incurred for 
personal preference or convenience. (See Sec. 301-1.3(a).)
    (2) Duty to record pertinent dates. The date of departure from and 
arrival at the official station or any other place at which travel 
begins or ends must be shown on the travel voucher. This same 
information also must be shown for points at which temporary duty is 
performed or for a stopover or official rest stop location when such 
arrival or departure affects the per diem allowance or other travel 
expenses. Other points visited also should be shown.
    (3) Fire safety responsibilities. An employee traveling on official 
business is strongly encouraged to stay at an approved accommodation as 
defined in Sec. 301-17.2(c) of this chapter.
    (b) Agency responsibilities--(1) Authorizing/approving rates. It is 
the responsibility of the head of each agency, or his/her designee, to 
authorize or approve only those per diem allowances that are justified 
by the circumstances affecting the travel and are allowable under the 
specific rules in this part. However, the per diem rates provided for 
under these rules represent the maximum allowable. To prevent 
authorization or approval of per diem allowances in excess of amounts 
required to meet the necessary per diem expenses of official travel, 
consideration shall be given to factors such as those listed in this 
paragraph that reduce the

[[Page 43]]

necessary expenses of employees (see specific guidelines in Sec. 301-
7.12 of this part for reducing rates):

    (i) Known arrangements or established cost experience at temporary 
duty locations showing that lodging and/or meals can be obtained without 
cost or at reduced cost to the employee;
    (ii) Situations in which special rates for accommodations have been 
made available for a particular meeting, conference, training or other 
temporary duty assignments;
    (iii) Traveler's familiarity with establishments providing lodging 
and meals at a lower cost in certain localities, particularly where 
repetitive travel or extended stays are involved;
    (iv) Modes of transportation where accommodations are provided as 
part of the transportation cost; and
    (v) Situations in which the Government furnishes lodging, such as 
Government quarters or other lodging procured for the employee by means 
of an agency purchase order (see Sec. 301-7.12(a) of this part).
    (2) Fire safety responsibilities. Each agency, as defined in 
Sec. 301-17.2(a) of this chapter, is responsible for influencing its 
employees who require commercial lodging when performing official travel 
to stay at an approved accommodation as defined in Sec. 301-17.2(c) of 
this chapter.

[FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41526, Oct. 12, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 
57 FR 28633, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 39, 59 FR 46193, Sept. 7, 1994; 
FTR Amdt. 53; 61 FR 64998, Dec. 10, 1996; FTR Amdt. 54, 61 FR 68159, 
Dec. 27, 1996; FTR Amdt. 54, 62 FR 6878, Feb. 14, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.3  Maximum per diem rates.

    Per diem allowances for official travel authorized or approved under 
this part shall be at daily rates not in excess of the maximum per diem 
rates established as provided in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this 
section. Per diem rates include a maximum amount for lodging expenses 
and a fixed allowance for meals and incidental expenses (M&IE). Maximum 
lodging amounts and the fixed M&IE allowances are separately reflected 
in the listings of per diem rates identified in paragraphs (a) through 
(c) of this section.
    (a) Continental United States (CONUS). The per diem allowances 
payable for official travel within CONUS shall not exceed the maximum 
per diem rates established by the Administrator of General Services and 
listed in appendix A. (See instructions in Sec. 301-7.4 for requesting 
rate adjustments within CONUS.)
    (b) Nonforeign areas outside CONUS. The per diem allowances payable 
for official travel in nonforeign areas shall not exceed the maximum per 
diem rates established by the Secretary of Defense and listed in 
Civilian Personnel Per Diem Bulletins published periodically in the 
Federal Register. The term nonforeign areas includes the States of 
Alaska and Hawaii, the Commonwealths of Puerto Rico and the Northern 
Mariana Islands, and the territories and possessions of the United 
States. Maximum per diem rates for nonforeign areas also are listed for 
convenience in section 925, a per diem supplement to the Standardized 
Regulations (Government Civilians, Foreign Areas).
    (c) Foreign areas. Per diem allowances payable for official travel 
in foreign areas shall not exceed the maximum per diem rates established 
by the Secretary of State and published in section 925, a per diem 
supplement to the Standardized Regulations (Government Civilians, 
Foreign Areas). The term foreign areas includes any area (including the 
Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands) situated both outside CONUS and 
the nonforeign areas as described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this 
section.


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.4  Rate adjustment requests for travel within CONUS.

    (a) Federal agencies may submit a request to GSA for review of the 
costs covered by per diem in a particular city or area where the 
standard CONUS rate applies when travel to that location is repetitive 
or on a continuing basis and travelers' experiences indicate that the 
prescribed rate is inadequate. Other per diem localities listed in 
appendix A will be surveyed on an annual basis by GSA to determine 
whether rates are adequate. Requests for per diem rate adjustments shall 
be submitted by the agency headquarters office to the General Services 
Administration, Office of Governmentwide

[[Page 44]]

Policy Attn: Travel and Transportation Management Policy Division (MTT), 
Washington, DC 20405. Agencies should designate an individual 
responsible for reviewing, coordinating, and submitting to GSA any 
requests from bureaus or subagencies. Agencies should submit their 
requests to GSA no later than May 1 of each year in order for the city 
or area to be included in the annual survey.
    (b) Requests for rate adjustments shall include a city designation 
and a description of the surrounding location involved (county or other 
defined area) and a recommended rate supported by a statement explaining 
the circumstances that cause the existing rate to be inadequate. The 
request also must contain an estimate of the annual number of trips to 
the location, the average duration of such trips, and the primary 
purpose of travel to the locations.

[FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41526, Oct. 12, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 23, 
57 FR 6678, Feb. 27, 1992; FTR Amdt. 47, 61 FR 10252, Mar. 12, 1996; FTR 
Amdt. 54, 61 FR 68159, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.5  General rules affecting entitlement to per diem.

    (a) No allowance at official station. A per diem allowance shall not 
be allowed within the limits of the official station (see definition in 
Sec. 301-1.3(c)(4)) or at, or within the vicinity of, the place of abode 
(home) from which the employee commutes daily to the official station. 
Agencies may define a radius or commuting area that is broader than the 
limits of the official station within which per diem will not be allowed 
for travel within 1 calendar day.
    (b) No allowance for travel of 12 hours or less. A per diem 
allowance shall not be allowed for official travel of 12 hours or less. 
(This requirement also applies for travel incident to a change of 
official station.)
    (c) Beginning and ending of entitlement. For computing per diem 
allowances, official travel begins when an employee leaves his/her home, 
office, or other authorized point of departure and ends when the 
traveler returns to his/her home, office, or other authorized point at 
the conclusion of the trip.
    (d) International date line. In cases where the traveler crosses the 
international date line (180th meridian), the actual elapsed time in 
days shall be used to compute the per diem rather than calendar days.

[FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41526, Oct. 12, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 
56 FR 23655, May 23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 54, 61 FR 68159, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.6  Lodgings-plus per diem system.

    Per diem allowances for all official travel, including travel 
incident to a change of official station, shall be computed under the 
lodgings-plus per diem system, except as otherwise provided in this 
part. Under this system, the per diem allowance for each travel day is 
established on the basis of the actual amount the traveler pays for 
lodgings plus an allowance for meals and incidental expenses (M&IE), the 
total not to exceed the applicable maximum per diem rate for the 
location concerned. The rules provided in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this 
section and in Secs. 301-7.7 through 301-7.10 shall be applied in the 
specific situations covered.
    (a) Maximum per diem rates--(1) For travel within CONUS. Maximum per 
diem rates prescribed under Sec. 301-7.3(a) for travel within CONUS are 
listed in appendix A. For all CONUS locations not specifically listed or 
encompassed by the defined boundaries of a listed location, the standard 
maximum per diem rate (standard CONUS rate) is prescribed.
    (2) For travel outside CONUS. Maximum per diem rates prescribed 
under Secs. 301-7.3(b) and 301-7.3(c) apply to travel outside CONUS.
    (3) Maximum rate applicable to change of official station travel. 
The standard CONUS rate shall be the applicable maximum per diem rate 
for en route travel performed in CONUS incident to a change of official 
station. Locality rates prescribed for locations outside CONUS will 
apply for en route travel performed outside CONUS incident to a change 
of official station.
    (b) Elements of per diem allowance--(1) Maximum lodging expense 
allowance. The maximum per diem rates include a maximum amount for 
lodging expenses. The employee will be reimbursed for actual lodging 
costs incurred up to the applicable maximum

[[Page 45]]

amounts. Receipts for lodging are required as provided in Sec. 301-
7.9(b).
    (2) Meals and incidental expenses (M&IE) allowance. The maximum per 
diem rates include a fixed allowance for meals and for incidental 
expenses (M&IE rate). The M&IE rate, or fraction thereof, is payable to 
the traveler without itemization of expenses or receipts. For a partial 
day of travel, the M&IE rate shall be prorated as provided in Sec. 301-
7.8 (a) or (c)(3), as appropriate.

[FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41526, Oct. 12, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 54, 
61 FR 68159, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.7  Computation rules for travel of more than 12 hours, but not exceeding 24 hours.

    When the travel for which per diem has been authorized is more than 
12 hours, but does not exceed 24 hours, the per diem allowance for the 
trip shall be calculated as follows:
    (a) Lodging not required. If lodging is not required, the per diem 
allowance shall be three-fourths of the applicable M&IE allowance for 
the temporary duty assignment location. If more than one temporary duty 
point is involved, the per diem allowance shall be calculated using the 
highest of the M&IE rates prescribed for the location where official 
business is performed.
    (b) Lodging required. If lodging is required, the per diem allowable 
shall be the actual cost of lodging incurred by the traveler, limited to 
the applicable maximum lodging allowance prescribed for the location of 
the lodging, plus three-fourths of the applicable M&IE rate prescribed 
for the lodging location.

[FTR Amdt. 54, 61 FR 68160, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.8  Computation rules for travel of more than 24 hours.

    The applicable maximum per diem rate for each calendar day of travel 
shall be determined by the travel status and location of the employee at 
12:00 midnight and whether lodging is required at such location. When 
lodging is required, the applicable maximum per diem rate shall be the 
maximum rate prescribed for the temporary duty location, or a stopover 
point where lodging is obtained while en route to, from, or between 
temporary duty locations (see Secs. 301-7.9 and 301-7.6(a)(3) for 
regulations on lodging location and maximum per diem rates applicable to 
change of official station travel, respectively). Only one maximum rate 
will be applicable to a calendar day or fraction thereof. Per diem for 
travel of more than 24 hours shall be calculated as provided in 
paragraphs (a) through (e) of this section.
    (a) Day travel begins--(1) Lodging required. When lodging is 
required on the day travel begins (day of departure from the home, 
office, or other authorized point), the per diem allowable shall be the 
actual cost of lodging incurred by the traveler, limited to the 
applicable maximum lodging allowance prescribed for the location of the 
lodging, plus three-fourths of the applicable M&IE rate prescribed for 
the lodging location.
    (2) Lodging not required. When lodging is not required on the day 
travel begins, (day of departure from the home, office, or other 
authorized point), the per diem allowable shall be three-fourths of the 
destination M&IE rate.
    (b) Full calendar days of travel--(1) Lodging required. For each 
full calendar day that the employee is in a travel status and lodging is 
required (whether en route or at a temporary duty location), the per 
diem allowable shall be the actual cost of lodging incurred by the 
traveler, limited to the applicable maximum lodging allowance prescribed 
for the location of the lodging, plus the applicable M&IE rate.
    (2) Lodging not required. For each full calendar day that the 
traveler is in a travel status and lodging is not required (such as when 
the traveler is en route overnight to the next temporary duty location), 
the per diem allowance shall be the destination M&IE rate.
    (c) Returning from travel--(1) Lodging required. For each full 
calendar day of travel when lodging is required at an en route location 
while the employee is returning to the official station, home, or other 
authorized point, the per diem allowable shall be the actual cost of 
lodging incurred by the traveler, limited to the applicable maximum 
lodging allowance prescribed for the location of the lodging, plus the 
applicable M&IE rate.

[[Page 46]]

    (2) Lodging not required. For any full calendar day of travel when 
lodging is not required while the traveler is en route overnight 
returning to the official station, home, or other authorized point, the 
per diem allowable shall be the M&IE rate applicable to the preceding 
calendar day.
    (3) Day travel ends--(i) No lodging required. For the day travel 
ends (day traveler returns to the official station, home, or other 
authorized point) the per diem allowable shall be three-fourths of the 
M&IE rate applicable to the preceding calendar day.
    (ii) Lodging required on the day travel ends. When an employee must 
perform official business at a temporary duty site en route to the 
official station, home, or other authorized point on the day travel ends 
and the agency authorizes the employee to obtain lodging, the per diem 
allowable shall be the actual cost of lodging incurred by the traveler, 
limited to the applicable maximum lodging allowance prescribed for the 
en route temporary duty site, plus three-fourths of the M&IE rate 
applicable to the en route temporary duty site.
    (d) Lodging obtained after midnight. Although per diem generally is 
based on the employee's location at midnight, there will be instances in 
which he/she is en route and does not arrive at the lodging location 
(either temporary duty location or en route stopover point) until after 
midnight. In such cases, the lodging shall be claimed for the preceding 
calendar day and the applicable maximum per diem for the preceding day 
will be determined as if the employee had been at the lodging location 
at 12:00 midnight of that day.
    (e) Commercial vessel. For vessel travel, except for the day of 
arrival on board (day of embarkation) and the day of departure from the 
vessel (day of debarkation), the allowable per diem rate will be $6 per 
day. When the $6 rate is not sufficient to meet the traveler's per diem 
expenses, a per diem rate equal to the anticipated expenses, not to 
exceed $9 per day, may be authorized or approved; except that the rate 
for travel by the Alaska Ferry System shall not exceed the standard M&IE 
rate for CONUS. Per diem will be computed under the lodgings-plus system 
on the days of embarkation and debarkation.

[FTR Amdt. 54, 61 FR 68160, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.9  Lodging--location, receipt requirements, and allowable expenses.

    (a) Lodging location rules--(1) Lodging at temporary duty location. 
It is presumed that the employee will obtain lodging at the temporary 
duty location. However, if the employee obtains lodging away from or 
outside the temporary duty location because of personal preference or 
convenience, the allowable per diem shall be limited to the maximum per 
diem rate prescribed for the temporary duty location.
    (2) Lodging not available at temporary duty location. In certain 
circumstances, lodging accommodations may not be available at the 
temporary duty location and the employee must obtain lodging in an 
adjacent locality where the prescribed maximum per diem rate is higher 
than the maximum per diem rate for the location of the temporary duty 
point. In such instances, the agency may make an administrative 
determination on an individual case basis to authorize or approve the 
higher maximum per diem rate. If the higher maximum rate is not 
justified and authorized in advance, the employee must furnish a 
statement with the travel voucher satisfactorily explaining the 
circumstances that caused him/her to obtain lodging in an area other 
than at the temporary duty point designated in the travel authorization.
    (b) Receipt requirements. Receipts shall be required to support all 
lodging costs for which an allowance is claimed under the lodgings-plus 
per diem system except that a statement instead of a receipt may be 
accepted for the fee or service charge incurred for the use of 
Government quarters. Receipts are not required when a specific or 
reduced rate has been authorized in advance of the travel as provided in 
Secs. 301-7.10 and 301-7.12.
    (1) Double occupancy. If the lodging receipt shows a charge for 
double occupancy, such fact shall be shown on the travel voucher with 
the name, and employing agency or office, of the person sharing the room 
if such person is a

[[Page 47]]

Government employee on official travel. One-half of the double occupancy 
charge shall be allowable for each employee. If the person sharing the 
room is not another Government employee on official travel, 
identification of the person sharing the room is not required and the 
employee may be allowed the single room rate.
    (2) Receipts lost or impractical to obtain. If receipts have been 
lost or destroyed or are impractical to obtain, a statement acceptable 
to the agency explaining the circumstances shall be furnished with the 
travel voucher, including the name and address of the lodging facility, 
the dates the lodging was obtained, and the cost incurred. Agencies may 
require employees to obtain copies of lost or destroyed receipts from 
the lodging establishment. (See also Sec. 301-11.3(d).)
    (c) Allowable lodging expenses. As provided in Sec. 301-7.6(b)(1), 
the traveler will be reimbursed only for his/her actual cost of lodging 
up to the maximum amount. Expenses incurred in the situations described 
in paragraphs (c)(1) through (5) of this section will be allowed as 
lodging expenses:
    (1) Conventional lodging. When an employee uses conventional lodging 
facilities (hotels, motels, boarding houses, etc.), the allowable 
lodging expense will be based on the single room rate for the lodging 
used (for double occupancy, see paragraph (b)(1) of this section). (See 
Sec. 301-7.14(a) for computing daily lodging expense when lodging is 
rented on a weekly or monthly basis.)
    (2) Government quarters. A fee or service charge paid for the use of 
Government quarters is an allowable lodging expense.
    (3) Lodging with friends or relatives. When the employee obtains 
lodging from friends or relatives (including members of the immediate 
family) with or without charge, no part of the per diem allowance will 
be allowed for lodging unless the host actually incurs additional costs 
in accommodating the traveler. In such instances, the additional costs 
substantiated by the employee and determined to be reasonable by the 
agency may be allowed as a lodging expense. Neither costs based on room 
rates for comparable conventional lodging in the area nor flat token 
amounts will be considered as reasonable.
    (4) Lodging in nonconventional facilities. When no conventional 
lodging facilities are present (e.g., in remote areas) or when there is 
a shortage of rooms because of an influx of attendees at special events 
(e.g., world's fairs or international sports events), costs of lodging 
obtained in nonconventional facilities may be allowed. Such facilities 
may include college dormitories or similar facilities and rooms 
generally not offered commercially that are made available to the public 
by area residents in their homes. In such cases, the traveler must 
provide an explanation of the circumstances which is acceptable to the 
agency.
    (5) Use of travel trailer or camping vehicle for lodgings. A per 
diem allowance for lodging may be allowed when the traveler uses a 
travel trailer or camping vehicle while on temporary duty assignments 
away from his/her official station. (See Sec. 301-7.14(b) for per diem 
computations in such situations.)


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.10  Deviation from lodgings-plus per diem system.

    An agency may determine that the lodgings-plus per diem system as 
prescribed in this section is not appropriate for certain travel 
assignment situations, such as when quarters or meals, or both, are 
provided at no cost or at a nominal cost by the Government or when for 
some other reason the per diem costs to be incurred by the employee can 
be determined in advance. (For example, see situations described in 
Secs. 301-7.12 and 301-7.14.) In such instances, a specific per diem 
rate may be established within the maximum per diem otherwise applicable 
to the travel situation and any appropriate reductions made in 
accordance with Sec. 301-7.12, provided the exception from the lodgings-
plus per diem system and the specific per diem rate are authorized in 
advance on the travel authorization by an appropriate official of the 
agency concerned. Such specific per diem rate authorized on the travel 
authorization shall be the per diem rate payable on the travel voucher 
without receipts and/or itemization by the employee.

[[Page 48]]


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.11  Rest stops when travel outside CONUS is involved.

    (a) When travel is direct between authorized origin and destination 
points which are separated by several time zones and either the origin 
or destination point is outside CONUS, a rest period not in excess of 24 
hours may be authorized or approved when air travel between the two 
points is by less-than-premium-class accommodations and the scheduled 
flight time, including stopovers, exceeds 14 hours by a direct or 
usually traveled route.
    (b) The rest stop may be authorized at any intermediate point, 
including points within CONUS, provided the point is midway in the 
journey or as near to midway as requirements for use of U.S. flag air 
carriers and carrier scheduling permit.
    (c) A rest stop shall not be authorized when an employee, for 
personal convenience, elects to travel by an indirect route resulting in 
excess travel time.
    (d) The per diem rate for the rest stop shall be the rate applicable 
for the rest stop location.
    (e) When carrier schedules or the requirements for use of U.S. flag 
air carriers preclude an intermediate rest stop, or a rest stop is not 
authorized, it is recommended that the employee be scheduled to arrive 
at the temporary duty point with sufficient time to allow a reasonable 
rest period before reporting for duty. A reasonable rest period shall 
not be allowed when travel is authorized by premium-class 
accommodations. (See Sec. 301-3.6 for guidelines on the use of U.S. flag 
carriers.)

[FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41526, Oct. 12, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 32, 
58 FR 58241, Oct. 29, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.12  Reductions in maximum per diem rates when appropriate.

    An agency may, in individual cases or situations, authorize a 
reduced per diem rate under certain circumstances, such as when lodgings 
and/or meals are obtained by the employee at a reduced cost or furnished 
to the employee at no cost or a nominal cost by the Government; or when 
for some other reason the per diem costs to be incurred by the employee 
can be determined in advance. In exercising its responsibilities 
outlined in Sec. 301-7.2(b), the agency should consider any known 
factors that will cause the traveler's per diem expenses in a specific 
situation to be less than the applicable maximum rates prescribed under 
Sec. 301-7.3. If it can be determined in advance of the travel that such 
factors are present, the agency should authorize a reduced rate that is 
commensurate with the known expense levels. Such reduced rate authorized 
on the travel authorization shall be the per diem rate payable on the 
travel voucher without receipts and/or itemization by the employee. When 
reduced rate situations involve partial days, per diem for such days may 
be three-fourths of the reduced rate, a special reduced rate prescribed 
for partial days, or an amount determined under the lodgings-plus 
system, as considered appropriate by the agency. Guidelines for reducing 
rates and situations where reduced rates may be appropriate include but 
are not limited to those provided in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this 
section.
    (a) When lodgings/meals are furnished by the Government--(1) 
Lodgings furnished. Normally when all or part of the lodging is 
furnished at no cost or at a nominal cost to the employee by the 
Government, the lodgings-plus per diem system automatically reduces the 
maximum per diem rate to the M&IE rate (or fraction thereof). When 
lodging is furnished at no cost to the employee through use of an agency 
purchase order, the agency shall not authorize or approve a per diem 
allowance for other per diem expenses that will, when combined with the 
cost of lodging furnished, exceed the applicable maximum per diem rate 
prescribed under Sec. 301-7.3.
    (2) Meals furnished. When all or part of the meals are furnished at 
no cost or at a nominal cost to the employee by the Federal Government, 
the applicable maximum per diem rate or the M&IE rate, as appropriate, 
shall be reduced to a daily amount commensurate with the expenses 
expected to be incurred by the employee. If a reduced per diem rate was 
not authorized in advance of the travel and meals were furnished at no 
cost or at a nominal cost

[[Page 49]]

by the Federal Government, the appropriate deduction prescribed in 
paragraph (a)(2)(i) or (ii) of this section shall be made from the total 
per diem payable on the travel voucher. If there is a charge for the 
meal for which a deduction has been made under this paragraph, 
reimbursement shall be allowed for the amount paid, not to exceed the 
amount allocated for the meal in paragraph (a)(2)(i) or (ii) of this 
section. The total amount of the deductions made on partial days shall 
not cause the employee to receive less than the amount allocated for 
incidental expenses.
    (i) CONUS locations. The applicable M&IE rate for CONUS locations 
shall be reduced by the dollar amount shown in the following table when 
meals are furnished to the employee without charge or at a nominal cost 
(see paragraph (a)(2) of this section) by the Federal Government.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         M & IE Rates   
                                                     -------------------
                                                      $30  $34  $38  $42
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Breakfast...........................................   $6   $7   $8   $9
Lunch...............................................    6    7    8    9
Dinner..............................................   16   18   20   22
Incidentals.........................................    2    2    2    2
------------------------------------------------------------------------


    (ii) Outside CONUS locations. The M&IE rates for localities in both 
nonforeign and foreign areas shall be reduced by the applicable dollar 
amount shown in appendix B when meals are furnished to the employee 
without charge or at a nominal cost (see paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section) by the Federal Government.
    (b) Extended stays. When travel assignments involve extended periods 
at temporary duty locations and travelers are able to secure lodging 
and/or meals at lower costs (e.g., weekly or monthly rentals), the per 
diem rate should be reduced accordingly. If the extended temporary duty 
is for training, see paragraph (d) of this section. (See also Sec. 301-
7.14 for allowable expenses in special situations.)
    (c) Meetings and conventions. In the interest of uniform treatment 
of employees, whenever a meeting or conference is arranged which will 
involve the travel of attendees from other agencies or components of the 
same agency, and reduced cost lodging accommodations have been 
prearranged at the meeting or conference site, the agency or agencies 
sponsoring the meeting or conference shall recommend to the other 
participating agencies or components a per diem allowance that would be 
reasonable.
    (d) Per diem for extended training assignments. (1) The Government 
Employees Training Act (5 U.S.C. 4101-4118) authorizes agencies to pay 
all or a part of the per diem expenses of an employee assigned to 
training at a temporary duty station. Implementing regulations 
prescribed by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in 5 CFR 410.603 
provide specific guidelines for payment of per diem expenses for 
employees on extended training assignments of more than 30 calendar days 
at temporary duty locations.
    (2) Generally the OPM guidelines require a reduced per diem of not 
more than 55 percent of the applicable maximum per diem rate prescribed 
in this regulation (see Sec. 301-7.3). Per diem above these levels (not 
to exceed the maximum per diem rates) must be justified. Agencies shall 
refer to the OPM guidelines in 5 CFR 410.603 for specific criteria to 
determine the appropriate per diem. Guidelines also are published by OPM 
in the Federal Personnel Manual, chapter 410, section 6-3.

[FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41526, Oct. 12, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 29, 
58 FR 12890, Mar. 5, 1993; FTR Amdt. 52, 61 FR 59185, Nov. 21, 1996; FTR 
Amdt. 54, 61 FR 68160, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.13  Mixed travel reimbursements.

    Mixed travel occurs when official travel within a single trip is 
subject to payment of per diem under the lodgings-plus system and an 
actual expense allowance under the actual expense system. Reimbursement 
will be computed under only one system for each calendar day except when 
the provisions of Sec. 301-8.2(b) or 301-8.3(a)(2)(ii) apply. When 
actual subsistence expense reimbursement for certain travel days is 
intermittent with the per diem method for others, the rules in Sec. 301-
8.6 govern.

[[Page 50]]


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.14  Per diem allowance computations for special situations.

    (a) Per diem for weekly or monthly rentals--(1) Types of expenses 
included in lodging costs. When an employee rents a room, apartment, 
house, or other lodging incident to a temporary duty assignment, the 
following expenses may be considered part of the lodging cost: the 
rental cost; if unfurnished, the rental cost of appropriate and 
necessary furniture and appliances, such as a stove, refrigerator, 
chairs, tables, bed, sofa, television, and vacuum cleaner; cost of 
connection, use, and disconnection of utilities; cost of reasonable maid 
fee and cleaning charges; monthly telephone use fee (does not include 
installation and long-distance calls); and, if ordinarily included in 
the price of a hotel or motel room in the area concerned, the cost of 
special user fees, such as cable TV charges and plug-in charges for 
automobile head bolt heaters.
    (2) Computation of daily lodging costs. When the employee obtains 
lodging on a weekly or monthly rental basis, the daily lodging cost 
shall be computed by dividing the total lodging cost for the expenses 
listed in paragraph (a)(1) of this section by the number of days the 
accommodations are actually occupied, provided that the employee acts 
prudently in renting by the week or month, and that the cost to the 
Government does not exceed the cost of renting conventional lodging at a 
daily rate. Otherwise the daily lodging cost shall be computed by 
dividing by the number of days in the rental period; e.g., 7 or 30 days, 
as appropriate.
    (3) Per diem allowable. (i) Under the lodgings-plus system, the 
allowable per diem consists of the daily lodging cost calculated under 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section plus the applicable M&IE rate not to 
exceed the maximum per diem rate prescribed for the location involved.
    (ii) When a reduced per diem rate is being established (see 
Sec. 301-7.12) in advance of the travel, the daily lodging cost 
calculated in paragraph (a)(2) of this section shall be added to the 
amount determined by the agency to be necessary for meals and incidental 
expenses.
    (b) Per diem allowances for use of a recreational vehicle for 
lodging. The term recreational vehicle includes mobile homes, campers, 
camping trailers, or self-propelled mobile recreational vehicles.
    (1) Privately owned--(i) Lodging costs. When an employee uses a 
privately owned camping or recreational vehicle while on official 
travel, allowable expenses which may be considered as a lodging cost 
include parking fees; fees for connection, use, and disconnection of 
utilities (electricity, gas, water, and sewage); bath or shower fees; 
and dumping fees. Depreciation shall not be considered as a lodging 
cost.
    (ii) Meals and incidental expenses. The agency shall determine an 
appropriate amount for meals and incidental expenses based on whether 
the type of recreational vehicle used by the employee has meal 
preparation facilities. Such amount shall not exceed the applicable M&IE 
rate.
    (iii) Per diem computation. The daily lodging costs plus an 
appropriate rate for meals and incidental expenses determined under 
paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section shall be the per diem rate, limited 
to the applicable maximum rate prescribed under Sec. 301-7.3 for the 
locality involved. An agency may authorize a reduced per diem rate 
within the applicable maximum per diem rate if the actual costs expected 
to be incurred can be determined in advance of the travel.
    (2) Rented recreational vehicle. When the use of a rented 
recreational vehicle is authorized or approved as advantageous to the 
Government, the rental fee and the allowable expenses shown in paragraph 
(b)(1)(i) of this section may be considered as lodging costs. 
Advantageous use might occur when the employee is on an extended 
temporary duty assignment in a remote area or where conventional lodging 
facilities are limited or not available. If use of a rented recreational 
vehicle is not authorized or approved as advantageous, only those 
expenses listed in paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section may be considered 
as lodging costs.
    (c) Per diem computations when temporary duty is curtailed, 
canceled, or interrupted for official purposes. When an

[[Page 51]]

employee has made advance arrangements for lodging (such as those 
described in paragraph (a) or (b) of this section), with reasonable 
expectation of the travel assignment being completed as ordered or 
directed, and subsequently the temporary duty assignment is curtailed, 
canceled, or interrupted for official purposes, or for other reasons 
beyond the employee's control that are acceptable to the agency, lodging 
costs may be calculated and paid as follows:
    (1) Travel assignment curtailed or interrupted. When the temporary 
duty assignment is curtailed or interrupted for the benefit of the 
Government or for other reasons beyond the employee's control and the 
employee is unable to obtain a refund of prepaid rent, expenses incurred 
for unused lodging may be reimbursed under the following conditions:
    (i) Determination of reasonableness. The agency must determine that 
the employee acted reasonably and prudently in incurring allowable 
lodging expenses pursuant to temporary duty travel orders. Included in 
this determination should be a consideration of whether the employee 
sought to obtain a refund of the prepaid lodging cost or otherwise took 
steps to minimize the costs once the temporary duty was officially 
curtailed or interrupted.
    (ii) Adjusted calculation and reimbursement of lodging costs. If the 
agency determines that the employee acted reasonably, the unused portion 
of the prepaid lodging cost may be reimbursed as follows:
    (A) The daily lodging costs for the period covered by the voucher 
shall be calculated by dividing the total cost for the rental period by 
the number of days of actual occupancy. The total of the lodging costs 
thus calculated plus the appropriate daily amount authorized for meals 
and incidental expenses may be reimbursed not to exceed the per diem 
rate authorized in the employee's travel orders for the days that the 
lodging was occupied.
    (B) If the authorized per diem rate is insufficient for the days of 
occupancy, the daily lodging cost calculated in paragraph (c)(1)(ii)(A) 
of this section plus the amount authorized for meals and incidental 
expenses may be reimbursed on an actual expense basis not to exceed 
appropriate maximum daily rates determined as provided in Sec. 301-8.3.
    (C) The excess amount (if any) of the unrefunded lodging cost not 
reimbursed under paragraph (c)(1)(ii)(B) of this section may be paid as 
a miscellaneous travel expense incident to the travel assignment, if 
otherwise proper.
    (D) In instances where the travel assignment was interrupted for 
official purposes (e.g., when the employee is directed to perform 
temporary duty at another location), allowable per diem expenses (if 
any) incurred during the interruption may be reimbursed separately from 
those reimbursements outlined in paragraphs (c)(1)(ii)(A) through (C) of 
this section, if otherwise proper and in conformance with the provisions 
of this part.
    (2) Travel assignment canceled. When the employee incurs lodging 
expenses in reasonable expectation of a travel assignment being 
completed as ordered or directed, and due to a change in travel orders 
the travel assignment is canceled before its commencement, the prepaid 
lodging expenses may be reimbursed as a miscellaneous travel expense 
provided the amounts are reasonable and the conditions in paragraph 
(c)(1)(i) of this section are met.
    (3) Forfeited rental deposits. If, in situations described in 
paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this section, the employee was required by 
the terms of a lease or rental agreement to pay a rental deposit and all 
or part of the deposit is forfeited to cover unpaid lodging costs, the 
amount of the forfeited deposit may be reimbursed as a miscellaneous 
travel expense provided the conditions in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this 
section are met. Reimbursement for deposits forfeited for damages to 
lodging accommodations shall not be allowed.
    (d) Per diem while aboard Government vessel. For temporary duty 
aboard Government vessels where meals and lodgings are furnished at no 
cost or at a reduced cost, agencies shall prescribe an appropriate per 
diem rate within the provisions of this part. The term Government vessel 
includes vessels owned and operated, leased and operated, or chartered 
by the Government.

[[Page 52]]


<R05>
Sec. 301-7.15  Interruptions of per diem entitlement.

    For purposes of this section, the term place of abode means the 
place from which the employee commutes daily to the official station.
    (a) Leave and nonworkdays--(1) General. Leave of absence (other than 
as provided in paragraph (d) of this section) for one-half, or less, of 
the prescribed daily working hours shall be disregarded for per diem 
purposes. Where the leave is more than one-half of the prescribed daily 
working hours, no per diem shall be allowed for that day.
    (2) Nonworkdays. Legal Federal Government holidays and weekends or 
other scheduled nonworkdays are considered nonworkdays. Employees are 
considered to be in a per diem status on nonworkdays except when they 
return to their official station or place of abode (see paragraph (b) of 
this section), or except under conditions stated in paragraphs (a)(2)(i) 
and (ii) of this section.
    (i) Leave before and after nonworkdays. Per diem shall not be paid 
for nonworkdays when:
    (A) Employees are in a leave status at the end of the workday before 
the nonworkdays and at the beginning of the workday following the 
nonworkdays, and
    (B) The period of leave on either of those days is more than one-
half of the prescribed working hours for that day.
    (ii) Leave between nonworkdays. Per diem shall not be paid for more 
than two nonworkdays in cases where leave of absence is taken for all of 
the prescribed working hours between the nonworkdays.
    (b) Return to official station for nonworkdays--(1) Required 
return--official business. An employee who is required by appropriate 
agency officials to return to his/her official station for the 
nonworkdays to perform official business or because it is otherwise 
advantageous to the Government shall be allowed the round-trip 
transportation expenses and per diem for the en route travel.
    (2) Authorized return--substantial cost savings. An agency may 
authorize per diem and transportation expenses to an employee to return 
home for nonworkdays where a significant cost savings will be achieved. 
Travel time shall be scheduled within the employee's duty hours to the 
extent practicable. The cost of lost productivity attributable to the 
duty hours involved in traveling to and from the employee's residence 
for nonworkdays shall be considered in determining the cost savings.
    (3) Authorized return incident to extended temporary duty. Employees 
who are required to routinely perform extended periods of temporary duty 
may, at agency discretion and within the limits of appropriations 
available for payment of travel expenses, be authorized round-trip 
transportation expenses and per diem en route for periodic return travel 
to their official stations or places of abode for nonworkdays. Agencies 
are cautioned that this authority is to be used with the utmost 
discretion and consideration of the length and purpose of the temporary 
duty assignments and the distance of the return travel. The periodic 
return travel may be authorized if the conditions specified in 
paragraphs (b)(3)(i) and (ii) of this section are met.
    (i) The head of the agency or his/her designee has determined, based 
on an appropriate cost analysis, that the costs of periodic weekend 
return travel (including the costs of potential overtime, if applicable) 
are outweighed by savings in terms of increased employee efficiency and 
productivity, as well as reduced costs of recruitment and retention of 
employees. This cost analysis shall be conducted no less frequently than 
every other year.
    (ii) Return travel for nonworkdays authorized under these provisions 
constitutes an exception to the directive on scheduling of travel 
contained in 5 U.S.C. 6101(b)(2) and therefore should be performed 
outside the employee's regularly scheduled duty hours or during periods 
of authorized leave. However, in the case of employees not exempt from 
the Fair Labor Standards Act overtime provisions, consideration should 
be given to scheduling the authorized travel to minimize payment of 
overtime, including scheduling of travel during regularly scheduled duty 
hours when necessary. (See Office of Personnel Management regulations 
for

[[Page 53]]

further guidelines covering overtime during travel.)
    (4) Voluntary return. When an employee voluntarily returns to his/
her official station or place of abode for nonworkdays, the maximum 
reimbursement for the round-trip transportation and per diem en route 
shall be limited to the per diem allowance and travel expenses which 
would have been allowed had the employee remained at the temporary duty 
station. The employee shall perform any such voluntary return travel 
during nonduty hours or periods of authorized leave.
    (c) Indirect route or interrupted travel. If there is an 
interruption of travel or deviation from the direct route resulting in 
excess travel time because of an employee's personal preference or 
convenience or through the taking of leave, the per diem allowed shall 
not exceed that which would have been allowed on uninterrupted travel by 
a direct or usually traveled route except as provided in part 301-12 for 
certain emergency travel situations. (See Secs. 301-2.5, 301-7.2(a)(2), 
and 301-11.5(a)(3).)
    (d) Illness or injury or a personal emergency situation. Provisions 
governing per diem allowable for emergency travel performed due to an 
employee's incapacitating illness or injury or because of a personal 
emergency situation, as well as the continuation of per diem due to 
incapacitating illness or injury of the employee, are found in part 301-
12.


<R03>
PART 301-8--REIMBURSEMENT OF ACTUAL SUBSISTENCE EXPENSES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301-8.1  General.
301-8.2  Conditions warranting authorization or approval of actual 
          expenses.
301-8.3  Maximum daily rates and reimbursement limitations.
301-8.4  Authorization or approval.
301-8.5  Requirements for documentation, review, and administrative 
          controls.
301-8.6  Mixed travel (per diem and actual subsistence expense) 
          reimbursement.
301-8.7  Interruption of subsistence entitlements.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5707.


<R05>
Sec. 301-8.1  General.

    This part applies worldwide (both within and outside CONUS) except 
as specifically provided in this part.
    (a) Authority. Agencies may authorize or approve reimbursement for 
the actual and necessary subsistence expenses of official travel when 
such expenses are unusually high due to special or unusual 
circumstances, or for occasional meals and/or lodging, as provided in 
this part. This authority shall be used for individual travel 
assignments or specific travel situations only after appropriate 
consideration of the actual facts existing at the time the travel is 
directed and performed.
    (b) Delegation of authority. Heads of agencies may delegate, with 
provisions for limited redelegation, the authority to authorize or 
approve travel on an actual subsistence expense basis. Such delegation 
or redelegation shall be held to as high an administrative level as 
practicable to ensure that authorization or approval of travel on an 
actual subsistence expense basis or reimbursement therefor is based on 
adequate consideration and review of the travel circumstances warranting 
such reimbursement.
    (c) Agency responsibility. Heads of agencies shall, in accordance 
with provisions of this part, prescribe administrative policies and 
procedures under which reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses 
of official travel may be authorized or approved to ensure that the 
authority contained herein is administered in accordance with the intent 
of this regulation.
    (d) Relationship to per diem. Generally, authorization or approval 
of actual subsistence expenses is contingent on the entitlement to per 
diem. Except as otherwise provided in this part, the definitions and 
rules stated in part 301-7 applicable to the employee's entitlement to a 
per diem allowance shall apply to travel on an actual expense basis.
    (e) Allowable expenses. Actual subsistence expense reimbursement may 
be allowed for the same types of expenses that are covered by the per 
diem allowance in Sec. 301-7.1(c) provided such expenses are determined 
to be actual and necessary expenses incident to the particular travel 
assignment.

[[Page 54]]

    (f) Prudent traveler. An employee traveling on the actual 
subsistence expense basis is expected to exercise the same care in 
incurring expenses as set forth in part 301-7 for travel on a per diem 
basis.

[54 FR 20288, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41533, 
Oct. 12, 1990; 55 FR 46064, Nov. 1, 1990; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-8.2  Conditions warranting authorization or approval of actual expenses.

    (a) Travel assignments involving special or unusual circumstances. 
Travel on an actual subsistence expense basis may be authorized or 
approved for travel assignments when the applicable maximum per diem 
rate (see Sec. 301-7.3) is inadequate due to special or unusual 
circumstances. The maximum per diem rate, although generally adequate, 
may be insufficient for a particular travel assignment because the 
actual and necessary subsistence expenses are unusually high due to 
special duties or because subsistence costs have escalated due to 
special or unforeseen events. Since lodging costs constitute a major 
portion of the subsistence expenses, travel on an actual expense basis 
may be authorized or approved for travel when, due to special or unusual 
circumstances, the lodging costs absorb all or nearly all of the 
applicable maximum per diem allowance. Examples of travel assignments or 
situations that may warrant authorization or approval of actual and 
necessary expenses include but are not limited to the following:
    (1) The employee attends a meeting, conference, or training session 
away from the official duty station where lodging and meals must be 
procured at a prearranged place (such as the hotel where the meeting, 
conference, or training session is being held) and the lodging costs 
incurred, because of these prearranged accommodations, absorb all or 
practically all of the applicable maximum per diem allowance;
    (2) The travel is to an area where the applicable maximum per diem 
allowance is generally adequate but subsistence costs have escalated for 
short periods of time during special functions or events such as missile 
launching periods, international or national sports events, world's 
fairs, conventions, or natural disasters;
    (3) Based on a situation described in paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section, affordable lodging accommodations are not available or cannot 
be obtained within a reasonable commuting distance of the employee's 
temporary duty point and transportation costs to commute to and from the 
less expensive lodging facility consume most or all of the savings 
achieved from occupying less expensive lodging;
    (4) The employee, because of special duties of the assignment, 
necessarily incurs unusually high expenses in the conduct of official 
business, such as to procure superior or extraordinary accommodations 
including a suite or other quarters for which the charge is well above 
that which he/she would normally have to pay for accommodations; or
    (5) The employee necessarily incurs unusually high expenses incident 
to his/her assignment to accompany another employee in a situation as 
described in paragraph (a)(4) of this section.
    (b) Situations requiring reimbursement for occasional lodging and/or 
meals. Although lodging and/or meals are furnished without cost (or at a 
nominal cost) for a particular assignment, the employee may necessarily 
incur expenses for occasional lodgings and/or meals. The agency may 
approve reimbursement of appropriate expenses incurred for occasional 
meals or lodging that are determined to be necessary and justified by 
the circumstances involved. The actual expense allowable for lodging or 
each meal may not exceed the applicable lodging or individual meal 
allowance provided in part 301-7, or 300 percent of those amounts if 
special or unusual circumstances are involved. If the travel is to a 
location where Sec. 301-8.3(c) applies under special

[[Page 55]]

or unusual circumstances, the authorizing agency shall determine an 
appropriate limitation on the amount of reimbursement. Each agency shall 
establish necessary administrative procedures for travel under this 
paragraph.

[54 FR 20288, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41533, 
Oct. 12, 1990; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 32, 
58 FR 58241, Oct. 29, 1993; FTR Amdt. 66, 62 FR 30279, June 3, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 301-8.3  Maximum daily rates and reimbursement limitations.

    This section establishes the maximum amount of reimbursement for 
actual subsistence expenses that may be authorized or approved for each 
calendar day or fraction thereof. Agencies shall determine appropriate 
and necessary daily maximum rates not to exceed these amounts when 
authorizing or approving travel under this part. Maximum daily rates 
need not be prorated for fractions of a day; however, see paragraphs 
(b)(1) and (2) of this section for reimbursement limitations.
    (a) Maximum daily rates--(1) Travel within CONUS. For travel within 
CONUS, the maximum daily rate for subsistence expenses shall not exceed 
300 percent of the applicable maximum per diem rate (rounded to the next 
higher dollar) prescribed in appendix A for the travel assignment 
location.
    (2) Travel outside CONUS. For travel outside CONUS, the maximum 
daily rate for subsistence expenses shall not exceed the greater of the 
amounts prescribed by the Departments of Defense and State, as set forth 
in the Joint Federal Travel Regulation/Joint Travel Regulation and the 
Foreign Affairs Manual, respectively, for nonforeign and foreign areas.
    (b) Reimbursement limitation--(1) General limitation. When the 
actual subsistence expenses incurred during any 1 day are less than the 
maximum daily rate authorized, the employee shall be reimbursed only for 
the lesser amount. Expenses incurred and claimed (including those for 
fractional days) shall be reviewed and allowed only to the extent 
determined to be necessary and reasonable by the agency. (See Sec. 301-
8.5(b).) Reimbursement for meals and incidental expenses shall not 
exceed:
    (i) 300 percent of the M&IE rate applicable to the temporary duty 
location; or
    (ii) $25 plus the M&IE rate applicable to the temporary duty 
location when the daily maximum rate authorized is established under 
paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section.
    (2) Specific meals and incidental expenses limitation. The agency 
may authorize or approve the payment of meals and incidental expenses on 
a flat rate basis without the need for receipts and/or itemization when 
such expenses are within the applicable M&IE rate. On full days of 
travel, the payment shall not exceed the applicable M&IE rate. On 
partial days of travel, the payment shall not exceed three-fourths of 
the applicable M&IE rate. The amount of the maximum daily rate in excess 
of the actual M&IE payment may be used for lodging.
    (c) When lodging is procured through use of an agency purchase 
order. When actual subsistence expense reimbursement is authorized or 
approved under this part and lodging is furnished to the employee at no 
cost through use of an agency purchase order, the agency shall not 
authorize or approve reimbursement for other subsistence expenses that 
will, when combined with the cost of lodging furnished, exceed the 
maximum daily rate authorized under paragraphs (a) and (b) of this 
section.

[FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41533, Oct. 12, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 19, 
56 FR 37478, Aug. 7, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, June 26, 1992; FTR 
Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58241, Oct. 29, 1993; FTR Amdt. 38, 59 FR 43500, Aug. 
24, 1994; FTR Amdt. 54, 61 FR 68160, Dec. 27, 1996; FTR Amdt. 66, 62 FR 
30279, June 3, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 301-8.4  Authorization or approval.

    (a) Requests for authorization or approval of actual expense 
reimbursement. It is the employee's responsibility to request 
authorization or approval for actual subsistence expense reimbursement 
when conditions appear to warrant such reimbursement and to furnish 
appropriate justification to support the request.
    (b) Prior authorization of actual expense travel. Normally, travel 
on an actual expense basis should be authorized in advance and the daily 
maximum

[[Page 56]]

rate authorized by the agency shall be stated in the travel 
authorization.
    (c) Approval after travel is completed. If travel is performed 
without prior written authorization or is authorized on a per diem basis 
and otherwise conforms to the provisions of this part, reimbursement for 
actual and necessary subsistence expenses may be approved after 
completion of the travel.

[54 FR 20288, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-8.5  Requirements for documentation, review, and administrative controls.

    (a) Documentation of actual expenses on the voucher--(1) 
Itemization. When travel is authorized or approved on an actual 
subsistence expense basis, the employee shall itemize on the travel 
voucher each expense for which reimbursement is claimed on a daily 
basis. Meals must be itemized separately; i.e., breakfast, lunch, and 
dinner. Those expenses that do not usually accrue on a daily basis, such 
as laundry and cleaning and pressing of clothing, may be averaged over 
the number of days that actual expense reimbursement is authorized or 
approved.
    (2) Receipts. Receipts shall be required for lodging, regardless of 
amount, and any individual meal when the cost is over $75. Agencies may, 
at their discretion, require receipts for other allowable subsistence 
expenses; however, the employee must be informed of this requirement in 
advance of travel. The provisions of Sec. 301-7.9(b)(1) and (2) covering 
double occupancy and missing receipts apply to this part.
    (3) Exception to receipts and/or itemization requirement. When an 
agency limits reimbursement for meals and incidental expenses to 100 
percent of the applicable M&IE rate (as provided in Sec. 301-8.3(b)(2), 
receipts and/or itemization of meals and incidental expenses need not be 
required except at agency discretion.
    (4) Fire safety responsibilities. An employee traveling on official 
business is strongly encouraged to stay at an approved accommodation as 
defined in Sec. 301-17.2(c) of this chapter.
    (b) Agency review and administrative controls. Procedures shall be 
established by each agency to ensure that actual subsistence expense 
reimbursement under the provisions of this part is properly administered 
and controlled to prevent abuse of the authority contained herein. (See 
Sec. 301-8.1(c).) An appropriate review of the justification for travel 
on an actual subsistence expense basis shall be made. Expenses claimed 
by an employee shall be reviewed by the agency to determine whether the 
expenses are reasonable and allowable subsistence expenses, and are 
necessarily incurred in connection with the travel assignment.

[54 FR 20288, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41534, 
Oct. 12, 1990; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28633, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 39, 
59 FR 46194, Sept. 7, 1994; FTR Amdt. 50, 61 FR 55578, Oct. 28, 1996; 
FTR Amdt. 53; 61 FR 64998, Dec. 10, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-8.6  Mixed travel (per diem and actual subsistence expense) reimbursement.

    (a) Generally, when actual expense reimbursement is authorized or 
approved for a particular temporary duty location, and is the only 
reimbursement system involved, the partial day of travel to and from 
that location also will be on an actual expense basis. However, if the 
en route travel to or from the actual expense location entails more than 
1 day, the agency may authorize actual expense reimbursement, or per 
diem in accordance with part 301-7, whichever is administratively 
advantageous and commensurate with the expenses expected to be incurred 
by the traveler.
    (b) If actual expense reimbursement authorized for particular 
locations is intermingled with per diem at other locations in a single 
trip, the agency shall determine when the transition between 
reimbursement systems occurs. Only one method or system is authorized 
for any given calendar day except as provided in Sec. 301-8.2(b) or 
Sec. 301-8.3(b)(2).

[54 FR 20288, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41534, 
Oct. 12, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 301-8.7  Interruption of subsistence entitlements.

    The provisions of Sec. 301-7.15 applicable to interruptions of per 
diem entitlement (leave and nonworkdays, return

[[Page 57]]

to official station for nonworkdays, indirect route or interrupted 
travel, and illness or injury or a personal emergency situation) shall 
apply to travel on an actual subsistence expense basis.

[FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41534, Oct. 12, 1990]


<R03>
PART 301-9--MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301-9.1  Expenses allowable.
301-9.2  Additional travel expenses incurred by an employee with a 
          disability.
301-9.3  Payment to Government employees.
301-9.4  Payment and reimbursements.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5701-5709; E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13747, 3 CFR, 1971-
1975 Comp., p. 586.


<R05>
Sec. 301-9.1  Expenses allowable.

    (a) Miscellaneous expenses. Charges for necessary stenographic or 
typing services or rental of typewriters in connection with the 
preparation of reports or correspondence, clerical assistance, services 
of guides, interpreters, packers, drivers of vehicles, and storage of 
property used on official business shall be allowed when authorized or 
approved.
    (b) Hire of a room. When necessary to engage a room at a hotel or 
other place to transact official business, a separate charge therefor 
shall be allowed when authorized or approved. (See Sec. 301-11.3(c)(8).)
    (c) Travelers checks, money orders, certified checks, or automated-
teller-machine (ATM) services. Reimbursement for the cost of travelers 
checks, money orders, or certified checks purchased in connection with 
official travel, as well as transaction fees for authorized ATM 
withdrawals, may be allowed. The amount of the checks, money orders, or 
ATM cash withdrawals may not exceed the amount of funds authorized to be 
advanced in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 301-10.3.
    (d) Fees relating to travel outside the continental United States. 
Reimbursement for the following items of expenses may be authorized or 
approved:
    (1) Conversion of currency. Commissions for conversion of currency 
in foreign countries. (See Sec. 301-11.5(e).)
    (2) Check cashing costs. Charges covering exchange fees for cashing 
United States Government checks or drafts issued for the reimbursement 
of expenses incurred for travel in foreign countries. (See Sec. 301-
11.5(e)(1).) Exchange fees incurred in cashing checks or drafts issued 
in payment of salary shall not be allowed in travel expense accounts.
    (3) Trip insurance. Cost of trip insurance purchased by employees 
for use of a Government-furnished or privately owned vehicle during 
official business for specific or individual trips into a foreign 
country. Trip insurance covers potential liability for property damage 
or personal injury or death to third parties. Reimbursement is limited 
to instances in which the purchase of such insurance is required by 
foreign statute or is a practical necessity due to the legal procedures 
of a foreign country which, in the event of an accident, could result in 
detainment of the driver or impoundment of the vehicle. The amount of 
reimbursement is limited to the cost of the minimum amount of insurance 
required for the use of a foreign country's roads or the minimum amount 
required to be purchased by industrial custom.
    (4) Travel document costs. Fees in connection with the issuance of 
passports, visa fees, costs of photographs for passports and visas, 
costs of certificates of birth, health, and identity, and of affidavits 
and charges for inoculation which cannot be obtained through a Federal 
dispensary.
    (e) Other expenses. Miscellaneous expenditures not enumerated in 
this section, when necessarily incurred by the traveler in connection 
with the transaction of official business, shall be allowed when 
approved.

[54 FR 20290, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 12, 55 FR 49894, 
Dec. 3, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 301-9.2  Additional travel expenses incurred by an employee with a disability.

    (a) Policy, applicability, and general rules--(1) Policy. In 
accordance with the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, (29 U.S.C. 
701 et seq.) and 5 U.S.C. 3102, these provisions are intended to 
accommodate an employee with a disability by providing for reimbursement 
of necessary additional travel expenses incurred in the performance of 
official travel.

[[Page 58]]

    (2) Applicability. This section applies to an employee with a 
disability as defined in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (3) General rule. Payment is authorized for the additional travel 
expenses listed in paragraph (c) of this section which are necessarily 
incurred by an employee with a disability in the performance of official 
travel.
    (b) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms 
have the meaning indicated:
    (1) Employee with a disability. The term ``employee with a 
disability'' means an employee who has a disability as defined in 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section, and is otherwise generally covered 
under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, 29 U.S.C. 701 et seq..
    (2) Disability. The term ``disability'', with respect to an 
employee, means:
    (i) Having a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits 
one or more major life activities;
    (ii) Having a record of such an impairment; or
    (iii) Being regarded as having such an impairment.
    (3) Physical or mental impairment--(i) The term ``physical or mental 
impairment'' means:
    (A) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, 
or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: 
Neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory 
(including speech organs), cardio-vascular, reproductive, digestive, 
genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic, skin, and endocrine; or
    (B) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental 
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and 
specific learning disabilities.
    (ii) The term ``physical or mental impairment'' includes, but is not 
limited to, such diseases and conditions as cerebral palsy, epilepsy, 
muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, 
mental retardation, emotional illness, and orthopedic, visual, speech, 
and hearing impairments.
    (4) Major life activities. The term ``major life activities'' means 
functions such as caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, walking, 
seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working.
    (5) Substantially limits. The term ``substantially limits'' means 
the employee is unable to perform a major life activity that the average 
person in the general population can perform; or is significantly 
restricted as to the condition, manner, or duration under which he/she 
can perform a particular major life activity as compared to the 
condition, manner, or duration under which the average person in the 
general population can perform that same major life activity.
    (6) Has a record of such an impairment. The term ``has a record of 
such an impairment'' means the employee has a history of, or has been 
classified as having, a mental or physical impairment that substantially 
limits one or more major life activities.
    (7) Is regarded as having such an impairment. The term ``is regarded 
as having such an impairment'' means the employee:
    (i) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially 
limit major life activities but the impairment is treated by the agency 
as constituting such a limitation;
    (ii) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits 
major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward 
such impairment; or
    (iii) Has none of the impairments defined in paragraph (b)(3) of 
this section but is treated by the employing agency as having a 
substantially limiting impairment.
    (c) Allowable expenses. The following expenses are allowable 
additional travel expenses payable to an employee with a disability:
    (1) Transportation and subsistence expenses authorized under this 
chapter that are incurred by an attendant accompanying the employee, 
whether the attendant is or is not a member of the employee's immediate 
family, when the employee requires the assistance of an attendant;
    (2) Cost of specialized transportation for the employee to, from, 
and/or at the temporary duty location;

[[Page 59]]

    (3) Cost of specialized services provided by a commercial carrier 
necessary to accommodate the employee's disability;
    (4) Costs incurred as a direct result of the employee's disability 
for baggage handling in connection with public transportation or at 
lodging facilities;
    (5) Cost of renting and/or transporting a wheelchair; and
    (6) Cost of premium-class accommodations when necessary to 
accommodate the employee's disability (the necessity must be 
substantiated in writing by a competent medical authority and authorized 
under Sec. 301-3.3 of this chapter).

[FTR Amdt. 25, 57 FR 8091, Mar. 6, 1992, as amended by FTR Amdt. 37, 59 
FR 27488, May 27, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 301-9.3  Payment to Government employees.

    Neither payment nor reimbursement shall be allowed under any 
agreement made by the traveler with an employee of the Government for 
personal services.

[54 FR 20290, May 10, 1989. Redesignated by FTR Amdt. 25, 57 FR 8091, 
Mar. 6, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-9.4  Payment and reimbursements.

    Where cash payment is made for services covered by this part, 
reimbursement for the charges actually made may be allowed provided the 
voucher shows the quantity, unit, and unit price. (See Sec. 301-
11.3(c).) If cash payment is not made, the account shall be approved by 
the traveler, certified by the payee, and forwarded to the 
administrative office for approval and payment direct to the person who 
rendered the service. The account must show the dates of service, 
quantity, unit price, and any other particulars that may be needed for a 
clear understanding of the charge. If a Government voucher form is not 
used, care should be taken that each account is submitted in duplicate, 
the original of which shall bear the approval of the traveler and the 
following certificate by the payee:

    I certify that the foregoing account is correct and just and that 
payment therefor has not been received.

[54 FR 20290, May 10, 1989. Redesignated by FTR Amdt. 25, 57 FR 8091, 
Mar. 6, 1992, and amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28634, June 26, 1992]


<R03>
PART 301-10--SOURCES OF FUNDS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301-10.1  General policy.
301-10.2  Procurement of common carrier transportation.
301-10.3  Advance of funds.
301-10.4  Use of foreign currencies.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5707.


<R05>
Sec. 301-10.1  General policy.

    (a) Minimizing cash requirements. As a general policy, employees 
traveling on official business are responsible for meeting their current 
travel expenses. However, Federal employees should not have to pay 
official travel expenses entirely from personal funds unless the 
employee has elected not to use alternative resources made available by 
the Government; i.e., contractor-issued charge cards, travelers checks, 
or contractor-provided automated-teller-machine (ATM) services. To 
alleviate the need for employees to use personal funds, agencies may 
issue travel advances for certain expenses as authorized by Sec. 301-
10.3. Agencies and travelers shall take all reasonable steps to minimize 
the cash burden on both the agency and the traveler. These steps shall 
include, but not be limited to, using Government contractor-issued 
charge cards. Where the use of Government contractor-issued charge cards 
is impractical for procuring common carrier transportation, agencies 
shall purchase required transportation tickets for employees using 
Government Transportation Requests (GTR's) as provided in Sec. 301-10.2, 
or centrally billed accounts as provided in Sec. 301-15.45.
    (b) Managing financial resources. To manage Federal financial 
resources more effectively for travel expense purposes, agencies shall:
    (1) Hold to a minimum the amounts of cash advanced for travel 
purposes as provided in Sec. 301-10.3;

[[Page 60]]

    (2) Follow-up with travelers to assure that vouchers are submitted 
within established timeframes as provided in Sec. 301-11.4(a); and
    (3) Process travel vouchers promptly to recover any excess travel 
advances or to provide payment to employees as provided in Sec. 301-
10.3(d). Agencies must establish internal policies and procedures to 
ensure that travel vouchers are paid within 25 working days after the 
end of each trip or travel period for which a voucher is filed.
    (c) Government contractor-issued charge cards. Agencies shall offer 
Government contractor-issued charge cards to all employees who are 
expected to travel at least twice a year (frequent travelers), 
consistent with each agency's internal travel regulations. Upon request, 
agencies shall issue the card to any employee authorized to perform 
official travel. Part 301-15, subpart C contains rules and procedures 
governing the issuance of Government charge cards. Travelers issued 
charge cards are encouraged to use them to pay for official travel 
expenses to the maximum extent possible.

[FTR Amdt. 9, 55 FR 10770, Mar. 23, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 12, 55 
FR 49894, Dec. 3, 1990; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28634, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-10.2  Procurement of common carrier transportation.

    (a) U.S. Government transportation requests (GTR's). All passenger 
transportation services by common carrier must be procured through the 
use of Standard Form 1169, U.S. Government Transportation Request (GTR), 
unless otherwise specifically provided herein and in 41 CFR 101-41.203.
    (1) Regulations governing use. The GTR and procedures for its use 
are prescribed by the Administrator of General Services in 41 CFR part 
101-41.
    (2) Use of the GTR. The GTR shall be issued and used only for 
officially authorized passenger transportation by common carrier or for 
authorized transportation services or accommodations furnished by common 
carrier; i.e., air, bus, rail, or vessel. The GTR shall not be issued 
and used in the following instances:
    (i) For personal transportation services or privileges which 
increase or exceed the cost of those authorized. When the travel is by 
an indirect route for personal convenience, the employee may not use a 
GTR to procure transportation accommodations for the indirect travel. 
However, a common carrier ticket procured by GTR for travel authorized 
at Government expense may be reissued for a common carrier ticket to 
travel by an indirect route for personal reasons. In such instance, any 
additional charges, including the applicable share of Federal 
transportation tax, incurred as result of the reissued ticket for 
personal convenience shall be at personal expense and paid directly by 
the employee to the carrier or travel management center (TMC).
    Additionally, when accommodations superior to those authorized are 
requested or used by the traveler for personal reasons, the additional 
cost, including the applicable share of the Federal transportation tax, 
shall be at personal expense and paid directly by the employee to the 
carrier or TMC;
    (ii) For individually procured taxicab, airport limousine, intracity 
transit, rental automobiles, or other for-hire automobile services;
    (iii) For payment of toll road or toll bridge charges; or
    (iv) For passenger transportation services costing $10 or less, 
excluding Federal transportation tax, or excess baggage services costing 
$15 or less for each leg of a trip, unless special circumstances justify 
use of a GTR.
    (3) Lost or stolen GTR. When a GTR in the possession of a traveler 
or other accountable person is lost or stolen, an immediate report shall 
be made to the administrative office in the manner prescribed by the 
agency concerned. If the lost or stolen GTR shows the carrier service 
desired, and point of origin, the named carrier and other local initial 
carriers shall be promptly notified. A GTR which is recovered subsequent 
to having been reported lost shall not be used but shall be sent to the 
administrative office. A traveler may be held liable for any expenditure 
by the Government caused through negligence on his/her part in 
safeguarding GTR's or tickets received in exchange for a GTR.

[[Page 61]]

(See Secs. 301-1.103(a), 301-3.5, and 301-11.5(c)(1).)
    (b) Cash payments for procurement of common carrier transportation 
services. The use of cash to procure passenger transportation services 
may not be authorized except under the conditions specified in 
paragraphs (b) (1) through (3) of this section. For this paragraph, the 
use of checks (personal or travelers), personal credit cards, or 
individual Government contractor-issued charge cards is considered the 
equivalent of cash. Cash payments may be made with a travel advance (see 
Sec. 301-10.3) or through the use of personal funds.
    (1) Procedures for the use of cash. The procedures for the use of 
cash to procure passenger transportation services are prescribed by the 
Administrator of General Services in 41 CFR 101-41.203-2, as follows:
    (i) When cost of transportation is $10 or less. Travelers shall use 
cash to procure all passenger transportation services costing $10 or 
less, excluding Federal transportation tax, and to pay excess baggage 
charges costing $15 or less for each leg of a trip, unless special 
circumstances justify the use of a GTR.
    (ii) When cost of transportation is over $10 but does not exceed 
$100. Agencies may, by appropriate regulations, require a traveler to 
use cash to procure passenger transportation services from, to, or 
between points in the United States and its possessions or the trust 
territories when the cost is over $10 but does not exceed $100, 
excluding Federal transportation tax, for each trip as authorized on the 
travel authorization (see note below).

    Note: The National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) will not 
accept a GTR for travel under $50. AMTRAK will accept personal checks or 
major credit cards provided proper identification is shown when 
purchasing a ticket.

    (iii) When cost of transportation exceeds $100. Except as noted in 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section, a GTR must be used to procure 
passenger transportation services costing in excess of $100, excluding 
Federal transportation tax, unless otherwise exempted in writing by GSA 
as provided in 41 CFR 101-41.203-2.
    (2) Exception to cash payment limitation. As an exception to the 
rule stated in paragraph (b)(1)(iii) of this section cash payment of 
official transportation expenses, without regard to the $100 limitation, 
is authorized under the following conditions:
    (i) Reduced group or excursion fares available from travel agencies. 
Cash payments in excess of $100 may be authorized by the agency for 
individual employees or a group of employees to secure reduced group or 
excursion fares available only through travel agents under certain 
conditions as provided in Sec. 301-3.4(b)(2). A copy of the 
administrative determination required under Sec. 301-3.4(b)(2) shall 
accompany the travel voucher.
    (ii) Use of individual Government contractor-issued charge card for 
procurement of transportation exceeding $100. Cash payment of passenger 
transportation services in excess of $100 is authorized when a 
participating agency or its employees use a charge card issued by a 
contractor under contract with the General Services Administration for 
official travel. Use of charge or credit cards held by the employee for 
personal use and issued by any other credit card company is not 
authorized under this exception. (See part 301-15, subpart C governing 
the Government's charge card program.)
    (iii) Emergency circumstances. Under emergency circumstances when 
the use of GTR's is not possible, heads of agencies, or their designated 
representatives, may authorize or approve travelers' use of cash 
exceeding the $100 limitation when procuring passenger transportation 
services as provided in 41 CFR 101-41.203-2(b). Under 41 CFR 101-41.203-
2(b), the delegation of authority to authorize or approve the use of 
cash in excess of $100 for the procurement of emergency transportation 
services shall be held to as high an administrative level as practicable 
to ensure adequate consideration and review of the circumstances.
    (3) Reimbursement--(i) Claim. The travel voucher claiming 
reimbursement for cash payments for transportation services shall show 
the ticket number, carrier name, accommodations used, origin and 
destination of

[[Page 62]]

travel performed, and the agent's valuation of the transportation 
ticket. A traveler who has procured passenger transportation services 
with cash (whether using personal funds, a travel advance, or a 
Government charge card) shall assign to the Government his/her right to 
recover any excess payment involving a carrier's use of improper rates. 
(See statement/voucher requirements in Sec. 301-11.5(c)(3). See also 
Sec. 301-1.103(b) for provisions on promotional materials received from 
carriers and Secs. 301-1.103(c) and 301-3.5 for provisions on denied 
boarding compensation.)
    (ii) [Reserved].

[54 FR 20291, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 9, 55 FR 10770, Mar. 
23, 1990; FTR Amdt. 12, 55 FR 49895, Dec. 3, 1990; FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 
23655, May 23, 1991; 56 FR 29439, June 27, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 
28634, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58241, Oct. 29, 1993; FTR 
Amdt. 50, 61 FR 55578, Oct. 28, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-10.3  Advance of funds.

    (a) Authority. The head of each agency or his/her designated 
representative may provide, through proper disbursing officers, to 
persons entitled to per diem (for subsistence expenses) or mileage 
allowances, an advance of travel funds in an amount deemed advisable 
within the criteria stated in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, 
considering the character and probable duration of the travel to be 
performed. Agencies shall issue advances in the form of travelers checks 
or authorized ATM cash withdrawals when those methods are determined to 
be in the best interest of the Government.
    (b) Limitation. Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, 
agencies shall limit the advance of travel funds to those estimated 
expenses that a traveler is expected to incur in connection with 
authorized travel (including travel incident to a permanent change of 
station) which normally would be paid using cash (``cash transaction 
expenses'' as defined in paragraph (b)(1) of this section). This 
limitation applies to advances issued for travel under single trip as 
well as open travel authorizations. However, for travel covered by an 
open travel authorization, advances shall be limited to the estimated 
cash transaction expenses for no more than a 45-day period.
    (1) Cash transaction expenses. Cash transaction expenses are those 
travel expenses that as a general rule cannot be charged and must, 
therefore, be paid using cash, personal checks, or travelers checks. It 
is assumed that travelers normally will be able to use a Government 
contractor-issued charge card to charge major expenses such as common 
carrier transportation fares, lodging costs, and rental of automobiles 
and airplanes. Therefore, expenses which will be considered cash 
transaction expenses are:
    (i) Meals and incidental expenses (M&IE) covered by the per diem 
rate or actual subsistence expense allowance;
    (ii) Miscellaneous transportation expenses such as local transit 
system fares; taxi fares; parking fees; ferry fees; bridge, road, and 
tunnel fees; and airplane parking, landing, and tiedown fees;
    (iii) Gasoline and other variable expenses covered by the mileage 
allowance for advantageous use of a privately owned vehicle for official 
business; and
    (iv) Other authorized miscellaneous expenses which cannot be charged 
using a charge card and for which a cost reasonably can be estimated 
prior to travel.
    (2) Allowable amount for meals and incidental expenses (M&IE). The 
amount advanced for meals and incidental expenses shall not exceed the 
prescribed M&IE rate or other amount authorized by the agency under 41 
CFR part 301-7 or 301-8, as appropriate.
    (c) Exceptions to travel advance limitation--(1) Authorized 
exceptions. The limitation provided in paragraph (b) of this section 
does not apply to the following change of official station expenses: 
temporary quarters subsistence, transportation and temporary storage of 
household goods or employee's automobile, or transportation of mobile 
homes.
    (2) Agency discretion. Agencies may, under the limited circumstances 
described in paragraphs (c)(2) (i) through (iii) of this section, 
increase the amount of the travel advance provided to the traveler.

[[Page 63]]

    (i) Use of charge card precluded. Travel circumstances are expected 
to preclude the use of a Government contractor-issued charge card to 
purchase transportation, lodging, car rental, or other travel expenses 
that normally would be chargeable.
    (ii) Charge card issuance denied. The agency determines that in 
certain situations an employee or group of employees should not be 
issued a Government contractor-issued charge card. The basis for this 
determination must be documented in the agency's internal travel 
regulations and might include infrequent travelers or travel 
circumstances where use of a charge card is nearly always impractical.
    (iii) Official change of station. The agency determines that the use 
of Government contractor-issued charge cards is not feasible for en 
route travel and househunting trip cash transaction expenses in 
connection with employees transferring between official stations, 
particularly those transferring between agencies.
    (3) Amount allowed. Travel advances under this exception shall not 
exceed 80 percent of the estimated additional cash expenses permitted 
under either paragraph (c) (1) or (2) of this section and authorized on 
the travel authorization unless a determination is made that the 80 
percent limitation will result in a financial hardship on the employee. 
In cases of financial hardship, the agency may advance up to 100 percent 
of these estimated expenses for an individual trip, or for an open 
travel authorization not to exceed a 45-day period.
    (4) Exception precluded. This exception authority may not be 
exercised in situations where the employee has elected not to use 
alternative funding resources made available by the Government; i.e., 
Government contractor-issued charge cards, travelers checks, or 
contractor-provided ATM services. This exception authority may not be 
exercised for travelers whose Government charge cards have been 
suspended or revoked because of delinquent payments.
    (d) Control and recovery of advances. Agencies shall establish 
internal financial controls for assuring that travelers with outstanding 
travel advances are notified of any delinquencies in filing vouchers and 
repaying outstanding advance balances, and that travelers are promptly 
paid amounts owed to them by the agency. These controls should include 
procedures for reviewing outstanding travel advances prior to an 
employee's separation, and for settling all outstanding amounts.
    (1) Deduction from vouchers. It shall be the responsibility of the 
head of each agency or his/her designee to ensure that the amount 
previously advanced is deducted from the total expenses allowed or that 
it is otherwise recovered. In instances where the traveler is in a 
continuous travel status, or where periodic reimbursement vouchers are 
submitted on an individual trip authorization, the full amount of travel 
expenses allowed may be reimbursed to that traveler without any 
deduction of his/her advance until such time as the final voucher is 
submitted. If the amount advanced is less than the amount of the voucher 
on which the advance is deducted, the traveler shall be paid the net 
amount. In the event the advance exceeds the reimbursable amount, the 
traveler shall immediately refund the excess.
    (2) Direct refunds. In the event of cancellation or indefinite 
postponement of authorized travel, the traveler shall promptly notify 
appropriate agency officials of such event and refund any monies 
advanced to him/her in connection with the authorized travel. In the 
event the traveler does not promptly refund the money, the head of the 
agency or his/her designee shall take immediate steps to secure the 
refund of any advance that may have been made.
    (3) Other means of recovery. Outstanding advances which have not 
been recovered by deduction from reimbursement vouchers or voluntary 
refunds by the traveler shall be promptly recovered by a setoff of 
salary due or retirement credit or otherwise from the person to whom it 
was advanced, or his/her estate, by deduction from any amount due from 
the United States, or by any other legal method of recovery that may be 
necessary. Salary or other amounts due shall be considered before the 
retirement credit. In view of these protections, which are specifically 
included in the law, travelers shall not be

[[Page 64]]

required to furnish bonds in order to obtain travel advances. (See 31 
U.S.C. 9302.)
    (e) Accounting for advances. Accounting for cash advances for travel 
purposes, recovery, and reimbursements shall be in accordance with 
procedures prescribed by the General Accounting Office (see General 
Accounting Office Policy and Procedures Manual for Guidance of Federal 
Agencies, title 7, Fiscal Procedures).

[FTR Amdt. 9, 55 FR 10770, Mar. 23, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 12, 55 
FR 49895, Dec. 3, 1990; FTR Amdt. 15, 56 FR 10378, Mar. 12, 1991; FTR 
Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58241, Oct. 29, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 301-10.4  Use of foreign currencies.

    Travelers to, in, and from foreign countries will use excess and 
near-excess foreign currencies owned by the United States for paying 
expenses of official travel, including payments to carriers providing 
service under Government transportation requests and bills of lading and 
for subsistence and other local expenses. The use of such currencies is 
prescribed by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-20, 
and a list of excess and near-excess foreign currencies is published 
periodically in OMB bulletins. The Department of State also issues an 
informational ``Foreign Currency Bulletin'' series concerning the use of 
foreign currencies. It is essential that travelers to, in, and from 
foreign countries and persons authorizing such travel be familiar with 
the latest version of these issuances. The OMB leaflet containing 
general guidance for using excess and near-excess foreign currencies 
should be furnished to travelers before foreign travel arrangements are 
made.

[54 FR 20291, May 10, 1989]


<R03>
PART 301-11--CLAIMS FOR REIMBURSEMENT--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301-11.1  Fraudulent claims.
301-11.2  Records of travel and expenses.
301-11.3  Travel vouchers and attachments.
301-11.4  Submission and review of travel vouchers.
301-11.5  Preparation of voucher.
301-11.6  Administrative approvals.
301-11.7  Suspension of charges.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5707.

    Source: 54 FR 20293, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 301-11.1  Fraudulent claims.

    A claim against the United States is forfeited if the claimant 
attempts to defraud the Government in connection therewith (28 U.S.C. 
2514). In addition, there are two criminal provisions under which severe 
penalties may be imposed on a traveler who knowingly presents a false, 
fictitious, or fraudulent claim against the United States (18 U.S.C. 287 
and 1001). Travelers' claims for reimbursement shall accurately reflect 
the facts involved in every instance so that any violation or apparent 
violation of those provisions may be avoided.


<R05>
Sec. 301-11.2  Records of travel and expenses.

    (a) Expenditure records. All persons authorized to travel on 
official business (see certificate on travel voucher form) should keep a 
record of expenditures properly chargeable to the Government, noting 
each item at the time the expense is incurred and the date. The 
information thus accumulated will be available for the proper 
preparation of travel vouchers.
    (b) [Reserved].

[FTR Amdt. 39, 59 FR 46194, Sept. 7, 1994, as amended by FTR Amdt. 53; 
61 FR 64998, Dec. 10, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-11.3  Travel vouchers and attachments.

    (a) Use of authorized form. All claims for the reimbursement of 
traveling expenses shall be submitted on authorized reimbursement forms 
and must be itemized and stated in accordance with this subtitle unless, 
for special reasons, compliance with specific requirements has been 
waived or modified by written determination of the Administrator of 
General Services.
    (b) Evidence of authorization. The travel voucher must be supported 
by a copy of the travel authorization. If the travel authorization has 
been filed or attached to a previous voucher, reference to the previous 
voucher shall be made.
    (c) Receipts required. Receipts are required for allowable cash 
expenditures

[[Page 65]]

in amounts in excess of $75. Lodging receipts are required as specified 
in Sec. 301-7.9(b) and Sec. 301-8.5(a) of this chapter. When receipts 
are not available, the expenditures shall be explained on the voucher.
    (d) Lack of receipt--(1) Impracticable to obtain. If it is 
impracticable to furnish receipts in any instance as required in 
paragraph (c) of this section, the failure to do so must be fully 
explained on the travel voucher. Mere inconvenience in the matter of 
taking receipts shall not be considered. In no case shall a receipt be 
taken in duplicate, except as provided in Sec. 301-4.6(c).
    (2) Confidential expenditure. When the duties of the traveler are of 
a confidential nature and the public interest so requires, the 
requirements for receipts may be waived by the appropriate 
administrative official.

[54 FR 20293, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28634, 
June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 45, 60 FR 62333, Dec. 6, 1995; FTR Amdt. 50, 61 
FR 55578, Oct. 28, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-11.4  Submission and review of travel vouchers.

    (a) Submission procedures. Agencies are authorized to prescribe the 
administrative procedures for travelers to follow in submitting travel 
vouchers under the guidelines published in this part. Number of copies 
required will be as directed by the agency. The time of submission will 
also be as directed by the agency but should be within 5 working days 
after completion of the trip or period of travel, or every 30 days if 
the employee is in a continuous travel status. Only the original of the 
voucher is required to be signed by the traveler. Travel voucher forms 
may be typed when prepared by clerical personnel from information 
provided by the traveler. However, typing of travel voucher forms is not 
required and should not be done when travelers prepare legible, 
handwritten vouchers. Handwritten vouchers must be prepared in ink.
    (b) Review to confirm travel was performed as authorized. The travel 
authorizing/approving official or his/her designee (e.g., supervisor) 
shall review the completed travel voucher to confirm that the travel for 
which expenses are being claimed was performed as authorized. The 
individual who performs the voucher review should have full knowledge of 
the employee's activities. Administrative approval of the voucher shall 
be in accordance with Sec. 301-11.6.
    (c) Administrative voucher review responsibilities. The travel 
authorizing/approving official or his/her designee (e.g., supervisor) 
shall ensure that the voucher is properly prepared according to 
pertinent regulations and agency procedures before it is certified for 
payment. This agency official shall review the claim to:
    (1) Ascertain accuracy of the amounts claimed;
    (2) Determine whether the types of expenses claimed are authorized 
and allowable expenses; and
    (3) Ensure that required receipts, statements, justifications, etc. 
are attached to the voucher in support of the claimed expenses.
    (d) Finance office responsibilities--(1) Accounting 
responsibilities. The agency office which has accounting 
responsibilities pertaining to the payment of travel and transportation 
reimbursement claims shall carry out its responsibilities in accordance 
with procedures prescribed by the General Accounting Office (GAO) in the 
GAO Policy and Procedures Manual for Guidance of Federal Agencies, Title 
7, Fiscal Procedures.\1\ Additionally, agencies shall establish 
procedures for collecting unused passenger tickets and transportation 
refund applications and for initiating the refund process in accordance 
with 41 CFR 101-41.209 and 101-41.210 (see Sec. 301-3.5).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ The GAO Policy and Procedures Manual for Guidance of Federal 
Agencies is available from the Distribution Section, Room 1100, U.S. 
General Accounting Office, 710 4<SUP>th</SUP> Street, NW (corner of 
4<SUP>th</SUP> and G Streets), Washington, DC 20548.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) Certifying officer responsibilities. The certifying officer 
assumes ultimate responsibility under 31 U.S.C. 3528 for the validity of 
the voucher, irrespective of review of the voucher under paragraph (b) 
or (c) of this section.

[54 FR 20293, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28634, 
June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 50, 61 FR 55578, Oct. 28, 1996]

[[Page 66]]


<R05>
Sec. 301-11.5  Preparation of voucher.

    (a) Itemization--(1) Chronological order. Expenses incurred shall be 
itemized on travel reimbursement vouchers in chronological order except 
that agencies may authorize travelers to enter total amounts spent 
during a voucher period for local telephone calls; local metropolitan 
streetcar, bus, and subway fares; and parking meter fees.
    (2) Leave of absence. When leave of absence of any kind is taken 
while an employee is in a travel status, the type of leave and number of 
hours of leave for each day shall be recorded on the travel voucher.
    (3) Indirect-route travel. The travel voucher should set forth the 
details of the expenses actually incurred, the date of departure from 
the post of duty, and the date of arrival at the place of duty. Where 
leave has been taken while in travel status, the date and time that 
leave began and terminated should be shown.
    (4) Suspended items. Items suspended from previous travel vouchers 
and reclaimed (see Sec. 301-11.7) must be stated after all other items 
have been listed.
    (5) Receipts attached chronologically. Receipts must be numbered 
consecutively, commencing with No. 1 for each account.
    (b) Subsistence claims--(1) Per diem. Itemization of subsistence 
expenses must not be made on the travel voucher where a per diem is 
allowed under part 301-7. The exact period for which per diem is claimed 
must be stated.
    (2) Actual subsistence expenses. When actual subsistence 
reimbursement is authorized under part 301-8, claims shall be submitted 
in accordance with agency requirements issued under Sec. 301-8.5.
    (c) Transportation expenses--(1) Transportation requests, unused 
tickets. The travel voucher must show, in the space provided for such 
information, the serial numbers of the transportation request(s) issued, 
with: Dates of travel, the points of departure and destination, classes 
of service used, name of transportation company, and the value of the 
transportation secured. Any differences in the actual travel performed 
as opposed to that shown on the GTR, shall also be shown. When 
itineraries are changed or trips canceled after tickets have been issued 
to the traveler, a statement shall be entered on the voucher, and 
initialed by the traveler, that tickets have been either used for 
official travel or all unused tickets, or portions thereof, have been 
properly accounted for and attached to the voucher. (See Sec. 301-
3.5(a).)
    (2) Special conveyance. When a special conveyance or a privately 
owned conveyance is used, the travel voucher must show the dates and 
points of travel and the type of conveyance used. If the distance 
traveled between any given points is greater than the usual route 
between these points, the reason for the greater distance shall be 
shown. When transportation is authorized by a privately owned conveyance 
on an actual expense basis, a statement shall also be furnished showing 
the make of the automobile used; the quantity of gasoline and oil 
consumed and places between which the travel was performed; the distance 
traveled and unit price per gallon or quart paid; and whether all 
gasoline, oil, garage rent, feed and stabling of horses, and bridge, 
ferry, or other tolls for which claim is made were used or required by 
official travel.
    (3) Cash payment for common carrier fare. A traveler using cash to 
purchase any authorized passenger transportation service for official 
travel as provided in Sec. 301-10.2(b) shall account for those expenses 
on an authorized travel voucher form, furnishing pertinent receipts 
(when required under Sec. 301-11.3(c)), passenger coupons, or other 
appropriate evidence to support the claim for reimbursement. Receipts 
are not required for local transit system fares. A traveler who has 
procured passenger transportation services with cash (whether using 
personal funds or a travel advance) shall assign to the Government his/
her right to recover any excess payment involving a carrier's use of 
improper rates by including the following statement on the travel 
voucher:

    I hereby assign to the United States any rights I may have against 
other parties in connection with any reimbursable carrier transportation 
charges described herein.


[[Page 67]]


    (d) Reporting payments to other employees. Reimbursement shall not 
be allowed for payments made to other Government employees for 
transportation expenses, except in cases of necessity, which shall be 
satisfactorily explained. (See Sec. 301-4.5.)
    (e) Foreign travel--(1) Claims for exchange fees. Charges for 
cashing United States Government checks issued in reimbursement of 
expenses incurred for travel in foreign countries shall be allowed in 
subsequent vouchers. (See Sec. 301-9.1(d)(2).)
    (2) Foreign currencies used. Persons traveling in foreign countries 
should report their expenditures by items in the money of the country in 
which the expenditures were made. The total expenditure in foreign 
currency must be converted into United States dollars at the rate or 
rates at which the foreign money was obtained. The rates of conversion 
and the commissions charged must be shown.
    (f) Erasures and alterations. Erasures and alterations in totals on 
travel vouchers must be initialed by the traveler, and erasures and 
alterations in the totals on receipts must be initialed by the person 
who signed the receipt.
    (g) Purpose of travel statement. The purpose(s) of travel shall be 
stated on the travel voucher form for each trip for which reimbursement 
is being claimed. If travel is performed for several different purposes, 
such as travel authorized under an unlimited open authorization or a 
limited open authorization, the purpose of travel for each trip must be 
stated on the reimbursement claim. The purpose of travel statement 
should be consistent with the purpose(s) stated on the corresponding 
travel authorization. (See Sec. 301-1.102(c).)

[54 FR 20293, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23656, May 
23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 50, 61 FR 55578, Oct. 28, 1996; FTR Amdt. 54, 61 FR 
68161, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-11.6  Administrative approvals.

    (a) Administrative approval of the voucher. The administrative 
approval of the voucher shall constitute the approvals required for:
    (1) Return to official station due to illness or injury. (See 
Secs. 301-2.4, 301-7.15(d) and 301-8.7, and part 301-12.)
    (2) Use of a privately owned conveyance on an actual expense basis. 
(See Sec. 301-4.6(b).)
    (3) Excess baggage charges. (See Sec. 301-5.2.)
    (4) Continuation of per diem during leave of absence due to illness 
or injury. (See Secs. 301-7.15(d) and 301-12.5(a).)
    (5) Continuation of actual subsistence during leave of absence due 
to illness or injury. (See Secs. 301-8.7 and 301-12.5(a).)
    (6) Charges for arranging reservations of accommodations. (See 
Sec. 301-6.4.)
    (b) Authorizations or approvals specifically stated. Except as 
listed in paragraph (a) of this section, the authorizations or approvals 
required by this regulation must be specifically stated in agency 
regulations, travel orders, or reimbursement vouchers. Such 
authorization or approvals include:
    (1) Authority for travel. (See Sec. 301-1.101.)
    (2) Travel required to places where meals are obtained. (See 
Sec. 301-2.3(b).)
    (3) Taxicab fares between residence and office on day travel is 
performed. (See Sec. 301-2.3(d).)
    (4) Taxicab fares between residence and office in cases of 
necessity. (See Sec. 301-2.3(e).)
    (5) Taxicab for local travel. (See Sec. 301-3.1(a).)
    (6) Rental of automobile or special conveyance. (See Sec. 301-
3.2(a).)
    (7) Hire of a conveyance from another employee or member of 
employee's family. (See Sec. 301-3.2(d).)
    (8) Use of accommodations superior to those authorized. (See 
Sec. 301-3.3.)
    (9) Use of extra-fare trains. (See Sec. 301-3.3(b)(5).)
    (10) Use of higher cost service when lower cost service is available 
on same mode of transportation. (See Sec. 301-3.4(c).)
    (11) Use of foreign flag air carriers. (See Sec. 301-3.6(c).)
    (12) Use of a privately owned conveyance when it is advantageous to 
the Government. (See Sec. 301-4.1(a).)
    (13) Use of a privately owned vehicle when use of common carrier 
transportation is most advantageous to the Government. (See Sec. 301-
4.3.)
    (14) Use of a privately owned vehicle when use of a Government-
furnished

[[Page 68]]

vehicle would be most advantageous to the Government. (See Sec. 301-
4.4(a).)
    (15) Reductions in maximum per diem rates when appropriate. (See 
Sec. 301-7.12.)
    (16) Additional per diem for travel by commercial vessel when the $6 
rate is insufficient. (See Sec. 301-7.8(e).)
    (17) Reimbursement of actual subsistence expense. (See Sec. 301-
8.4.)
    (18) Maximum daily reimbursement. (See Sec. 301-8.3.)
    (19) Miscellaneous expenses. (See Secs. 301-9.1 (a) and (e).)
    (20) Hire of a room. (See Sec. 301-9.1(b).)
    (21) Travelers checks, money orders, certified checks, or 
contractor-provided automated-teller-machine (ATM) services. (See 
Sec. 301-9.1(c).)
    (22) Fees relating to travel outside continental United States. (See 
Sec. 301-9.1(d).)
    (23) Additional travel expenses incurred by an employee with a 
disability. (See Sec. 301-9.2.)
    (24) Payment of account when agency billed direct. (See Sec. 301-
9.4.)
    (25) Waiver of requirements for receipts. (See Sec. 301-11.3(d)(2).)
    (26) Waiver of itemization for local telephone calls; local 
metropolitan streetcar, bus, and subway fares; and parking meter fees. 
(See Sec. 301-11.5(a)(1).)
    (27) Return to official station due to a personal emergency 
situation. (See Secs. 301-2.4, 301-7.15(d), and 301-8.7, and part 301-
12.)
    (28) Travel to an alternate location due to illness or injury or a 
personal emergency situation. (See Secs. 301-2.4, 301-7.15(d), and 301-
8.7, and part 301-12.)

[54 FR 20293, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41534, 
Oct. 12, 1990; FTR Amdt. 12, 55 FR 49895, Dec. 3, 1990; FTR Amdt. 17, 56 
FR 23656, May 23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 25, 57 FR 8092, Mar. 6, 1992; FTR 
Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58241, Oct. 29, 1993; FTR Amdt. 54, 61 FR 68161, Dec. 
27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 301-11.7  Suspension of charges.

    Items in travel vouchers not stated in accordance with this 
regulation or not properly supported by receipts when required shall be 
suspended, and the notification of such action shall indicate the 
reasons therefor. Such items as may be subsequently allowable shall be 
included in a subsequent regular or supplemental travel voucher. Full 
itemization shall be required for all suspended items which are 
reclaimed and charges must be supported by the original suspension 
notice or a copy thereof.


<R03>
PART 301-12--EMERGENCY TRAVEL OF EMPLOYEE DUE TO ILLNESS OR INJURY OR A PERSONAL EMERGENCY SITUATION, WITHIN OR OUTSIDE CONUS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301-12.1  General.
301-12.2  Agency responsibility/delegation of authority.
301-12.3  Employee responsibility and documentation.
301-12.4  Definitions.
301-12.5  Incapacitating illness or injury of employee.
301-12.6  Personal emergency situation.
301-12.7  Procurement of transportation.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5701-5709; E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13747, 3 CFR, 1971-
1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: 54 FR 20295, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 301-12.1  General.

    Transportation and per diem expenses may be allowed to the extent 
provided in this part when an employee discontinues or interrupts a 
temporary duty travel assignment before its completion because of 
incapacitating illness or injury or a personal emergency situation.

[54 FR 20295, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41534, 
Oct. 12, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 301-12.2  Agency responsibility/delegation of authority.

    Agencies may authorize or approve reimbursement for transportation 
and per diem expenses based on the exigencies of the employee's personal 
situation and the agency mission. Each agency shall prescribe written 
administrative policies and procedures to govern its authorizations and 
approvals under this part. Agency heads may delegate their authority 
under this part. Such delegation shall be held to as high an 
administrative level as practical to ensure adequate consideration

[[Page 69]]

and review of the circumstances surrounding the need for emergency 
travel.

[54 FR 20295, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28634, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-12.3  Employee responsibility and documentation.

    As soon as an employee is incapacitated by illness or injury or 
informed of an emergency situation which necessitates discontinuance or 
interruption of the temporary duty travel assignment, he/she should 
attempt to contact the designated travel-approving official for 
instructions. In the event that such contact cannot be made on a timely 
basis, agencies may approve payments after the travel has been 
performed.


<R05>
Sec. 301-12.4  Definitions.

    As used in this part, the following definitions apply:
    (a) Official station. The term official station also refers to the 
home or regular place of business as it pertains to experts and 
consultants described in 5 U.S.C. 5703. (See Sec. 301-1.3(c)(2).)
    (b) Alternate location. An alternate location is a destination, 
other than the employee's official station or the point of interruption, 
where necessary medical services or a personal emergency situation 
exists. In the case of illness or injury of the employee, the nearest 
hospital or medical facility capable of treating the illness or injury 
is not considered to be an alternate location.
    (c) Incapacitating illness or injury of employee. For purposes of 
this part, an incapacitating illness or injury is one that occurs 
suddenly for reasons other than the employee's own misconduct and 
renders the employee incapable of continuing, either temporarily or 
permanently, the travel assignment. A sudden illness or injury may 
include a recurrence of a previous medical condition thought to have 
been cured or under control. The illness or injury may occur while the 
employee is at, or en route to or from, a temporary duty location.
    (d) Family. Family means those individuals defined in Sec. 302-
1.4(f) of this title who are members of the employee's household at the 
time the emergency situation arises. For compassionate reasons, when 
warranted by the circumstances of a particular emergency situation, an 
agency may on an individual case basis expand this definition to 
encompass other members of the extended family of an employee and 
employee's spouse, such as the individuals named in Sec. 302-1.4(f) of 
this title who are not dependents of the employee or members of the 
employee's immediate household. In using this authority and deciding 
each case, agencies shall evaluate the extent of the emergency and the 
employee's relationship to, and degree of responsibility for, the 
individual(s) involved in the emergency situation.
    (e) Personal emergency situation. Personal emergency situation means 
the death or serious illness or injury of a member of the employee's 
family or a catastrophic occurrence or impending disaster such as a 
fire, flood, or act of God which directly affects the employee's home at 
the official station or the family and occurs while the employee is at, 
or en route to or from, a temporary duty location.
    (f) Serious illness or injury of family member. Serious illness or 
injury of a family member means a grave, critical, or potentially life-
threatening illness or injury; a sudden injury such as an automobile or 
other accident where the exact extent of injury may be undetermined but 
is thought to be critical or potentially life threatening based on the 
best assessment available; or other situations involving less serious 
illness or injury of a family member in which the absence of the 
employee would result in great personal hardship for the immediate 
family.
    (g) Fire, flood, or act of God. Fires or floods may be due to 
natural causes or human actions (e.g., arson) or other identifiable 
causes. Act of God means an extraordinary happening by a natural cause 
(as fire, flood, tornado, hurricane, earthquake, or other natural 
catastrophe) for which no one is liable because experience, foresight, 
or care could not prevent it.

[54 FR 20295, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23656, May 
23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28634, June 26, 1992]

[[Page 70]]


<R05>
Sec. 301-12.5  Incapacitating illness or injury of employee.

    When an employee interrupts or discontinues a travel assignment 
because of an incapacitating illness or injury (as defined in Sec. 301-
12.4(c)), transportation expenses and per diem may be allowed to the 
extent provided in this section.
    (a) Continuation of per diem at point of interruption. An employee 
who interrupts the temporary duty assignment because of an 
incapacitating illness or injury and takes leave of any kind shall be 
allowed a per diem allowance under the provisions of Sec. 301-7.6 not to 
exceed the maximum rates prescribed under Sec. 301-7.3 for the location 
where the interruption occurs. Such per diem may be continued for a 
reasonable period, normally not to exceed 14 calendar days (including 
fractional days) for any one period of absence. However, a longer period 
may be approved by the employee's agency if justified by the 
circumstances of a particular case. The point of interruption may 
include the nearest hospital or medical facility capable of treating the 
employee's illness or injury. Per diem shall not be allowed while an 
employee is confined to the hospital or medical facility that is within 
the proximity of the official station or that is the same one the 
employee would have been admitted to if the illness or injury had 
occurred while at the official station.
    (1) Receipt of payments from other Federal sources. If, while in 
travel status under circumstances described in paragraph (a) of this 
section, the employee receives hospitalization (or is reimbursed for 
hospital expenses) under any Federal statute (including hospitalization 
in a Veterans Administration or military hospital) other than 5 U.S.C. 
8901-8913 (Federal Employees Health Benefits Program), the per diem 
allowance for the period involved shall not be paid or, if paid, shall 
be collected from the employee.
    (2) Documentation and evidence of illness. The type of leave and its 
duration must be stated on the travel voucher. No additional evidence of 
the illness or injury need be submitted with the travel voucher. The 
evidence filed with the agency concerned, as required by that agency 
under the annual and sick leave regulations of the Office of Personnel 
Management, shall suffice.
    (b) Return to official station or home. When an employee 
discontinues a temporary duty assignment before its completion because 
of an incapacitating illness or injury, expenses of appropriate 
transportation and per diem while en route shall be allowed for return 
travel to the official station. Such return travel may be from the point 
of interruption or other point where the per diem allowance was 
continued as provided in paragraph (a) of this section. If, when the 
employee's health has been restored, the agency decides that it is in 
the Government's interest to return the employee to the temporary duty 
location, such return is considered to be a new travel assignment at 
Government expense.
    (c) Travel to an alternate location and return to the temporary duty 
assignment--(1) Conditions and allowable expenses. When an employee, 
with the approval of an appropriate agency official, interrupts a 
temporary duty assignment because of an incapacitating illness or injury 
and takes leave of absence for travel to an alternate location to obtain 
medical services and returns to the temporary duty assignment, 
reimbursement for certain excess travel costs may be allowed as provided 
in paragraph (c)(2) of this section. The nearest hospital or medical 
facility capable of treating the employee's illness or injury will not 
be considered an alternate location (see Sec. 301-12.4(b)).
    (2) Calculation of excess costs. The reimbursement that may be 
authorized or approved under paragraph (c)(1) of this section, shall be 
the excess (if any) of actual costs of travel from the point of 
interruption to the alternate location and return to the temporary duty 
assignment, over the constructive costs of round-trip travel between the 
official station and the alternate location. The actual cost of travel 
will be the transportation expenses incurred and en route per diem for 
the travel as actually performed from the point of interruption to the 
alternate location and from the alternate location to the temporary duty 
assignment. (No per diem is allowed for the time spent at

[[Page 71]]

the alternate location.) The constructive cost of travel is the sum of 
transportation expenses the employee would reasonably have incurred for 
round-trip travel between the official station and the alternate 
location (had the travel begun at the official station) plus per diem 
calculated under part 301-7 for the appropriate en route travel time. 
The excess cost that may be reimbursed is the difference between the two 
calculations.

[54 FR 20295, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41534, 
Oct. 12, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 301-12.6  Personal emergency situation.

    (a) Return to official station or home. When an employee 
discontinues a temporary duty assignment before its completion because 
of a personal emergency situation as defined in Sec. 301-12.4(e), 
expenses of appropriate transportation and per diem while en route may 
be allowed, with the approval of an appropriate agency official, for 
return travel from the point of interruption to the official station. 
If, when the personal emergency situation has been resolved, the agency 
decides that it is in the Government's interest to return the employee 
to the temporary duty location, such return is considered to be a new 
travel assignment at Government expense.
    (b) Travel to an alternate location and return to the temporary duty 
assignment. When an employee, with the approval of an appropriate agency 
official, interrupts a temporary duty assignment because of a personal 
emergency situation, takes leave of absence for travel to an alternate 
location where the personal emergency exists, and returns to the 
temporary duty assignment, reimbursement may be allowed for certain 
excess travel costs (transportation and en route per diem) to the same 
extent as provided in Sec. 301-12.5(c) for incapacitating illness or 
injury of the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 301-12.7  Procurement of transportation.

    (a) Use of discount fares. The discount fares offered by contract 
air carriers in certain city pairs, as well as other reduced fares 
available to Federal travelers on official business, should be used to 
the extent possible for travel authorized or approved under this part.
    (b) Return to official station. When the employee is authorized 
emergency return travel, from the point of interruption or 
discontinuance of the travel assignment to the official station, 
appropriate transportation services may be purchased by the agency or 
the employee. The unused return portion of round-trip transportation 
tickets procured by the agency for the travel assignment shall be used, 
if appropriate, for the mode of transportation required for the 
emergency travel. If not used, the agency and the employee shall ensure 
that all unused tickets are properly accounted for (see Sec. 301-3.5).
    (c) Travel to alternate location. An agency may require employees to 
use personal funds for emergency travel to an alternate location and 
return to the temporary duty assignment. A Government contractor-issued 
charge card also may be used for this purpose. However, if the employee 
does not have sufficient personal funds available and is not a 
Government charge card holder, the agency may procure (or provide an 
advance of funds for the employee to procure) appropriate 
transportation. The employee, upon completion of the emergency travel, 
shall reimburse the Government for any cost of such transportation or 
travel advance that is above the amount of allowable reimbursement that 
may be authorized or approved under this part.

[54 FR 20295, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28634, 
June 26, 1992]


<R03>
PART 301-13 [RESERVED]

<R05>



<R03>
PART 301-14--PAYMENT OF SUBSISTENCE AND TRANSPORTATION EXPENSES FOR THREATENED LAW ENFORCEMENT/INVESTIGATIVE EMPLOYEES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301-14.1  Authority.
301-14.2  Agency responsibility/delegation of authority.
301-14.3  Policy.
301-14.4  Eligible individuals.
301-14.5  Procedures for evaluating risk to threatened individuals.
301-14.6  Eligibility conditions and limitations.

[[Page 72]]

301-14.7  Allowable subsistence payments.
301-14.8  Transportation to and from a location away from the employee's 
          designated post of duty.
301-14.9  Authorizations and payment of claims.
301-14.10  Advance of funds.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5701-5709; E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13747, 3 CFR, 1971-
1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: 54 FR 20297, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 301-14.1  Authority.

    The head of an employing agency (hereafter referred to as 
``agency'') may authorize or approve payment of subsistence and certain 
transportation expenses for threatened individuals (see Sec. 301-14.4) 
whose lives are placed in jeopardy as a result of the employee's 
assigned duties and who, as a protective measure, are moved to temporary 
living accommodations at or away from the official station within or 
outside CONUS.


<R05>
Sec. 301-14.2  Agency responsibility/delegation of authority.

    Heads of agencies are responsible for issuing regulations or 
guidelines to implement the provisions of this part and for ensuring 
that the agency's policy is adhered to. The agency head may delegate the 
authority to authorize or approve payment of allowable subsistence and 
transportation expenses for the use of temporary living accommodations 
by eligible individuals as provided in this part. The delegation of 
authority shall be held to as high an administrative level as practical 
to ensure proper review of the circumstances surrounding the need to 
take protective action by moving eligible individuals from their homes.

[54 FR 20297, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28634, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-14.3  Policy.

    The authority under Sec. 301-14.1 is to be given priority 
consideration when the life-threatening situation is expected to be of 
temporary duration (normally no more than 60 days) and the only feasible 
alternative is to transfer the employeee to a new duty station. The head 
of an agency or his/her designee must make the final decision as to how 
long such payments should continue based on the specific nature and 
potential duration of the life-threatening situation and the alternative 
costs of a change of official station for protective purposes.


<R05>
Sec. 301-14.4  Eligible individuals.

    Employees (as defined in Sec. 301-1.3(c)(2)) who specifically serve 
in a law enforcement, investigative, or similar capacity, or other 
Federal employees detailed into these capacities for special law 
enforcement/investigational purposes, are eligible for the allowances 
covered by this part. The employing agency shall be deemed to be the one 
to whom the employee was assigned at the time of the threat. Members of 
such employees' immediate families (as defined in Sec. 302-1.4(f) of 
this subtitle) also are eligible.

[54 FR 20297, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23656, May 
23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28634, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-14.5  Procedures for evaluating risk to threatened individuals.

    When a situation occurs that appears to be life-threatening, the 
agency's first responsibility is to take any appropriate action 
necessary to protect the eligible individual(s), including removal from 
the home. The agency may ask the Criminal Division of the Department of 
Justice (DOJ) for assistance in determining the degree and seriousness 
of the threat. The agency, however, ultimately is responsible for 
deciding in each individual case, based on its own assessment of the 
situation (and the advice of the DOJ, if requested and furnished), 
whether protective action should be initiated, or continued if already 
undertaken, and the amount of subsistence and transportation expenses 
that will be approved. At 30-day intervals the agency will reevaluate 
the situation and decide whether any further extension of the time 
period is appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 301-14.6  Eligibility conditions and limitations.

    (a) Limits on duration of temporary living accommodations. 
Subsistence payments may begin as soon as the agency decides to invoke 
the provisions of this part in a particular situation. Normally, 
subsistence payments may be

[[Page 73]]

allowed for a period of no more than 60 days; the agency may, however, 
approve extensions of the time period as provided in Sec. 301-14.5. If 
the threatened individuals are directed to move immediately into 
temporary accommodations while the agency assesses the degree and 
seriousness of the threat, subsistence payments for this period may be 
allowed, even when the agency ultimately determines that the threat is 
not serious or no longer exists and decides to return the individuals to 
their home. When necessary occupancy of temporary living accommodations 
is expected to exceed 120 days, the agency should consider whether 
permanently relocating the employee would be advantageous given the 
specific nature of the threat, the continued disruption of the family, 
and the alternative costs of a change of official station.
    (b) Location of temporary living accommodations. The temporary 
living accommodations may be located in the vicinity of the employee's 
official station or at an alternate location away from the official 
station as circumstances warrant. When justified, the employee and 
immediate family members may occupy temporary living accommodations at 
different locations. The agency will designate the appropriate 
locations.

[54 FR 20297, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41534, 
Oct. 12, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 301-14.7  Allowable subsistence payments.

    (a) Expenses covered. Payments under this authority are intended to 
cover only reasonable and necessary subsistence expenses actually 
incurred incident to the occupancy of temporary living accommodations. 
Subsistence payments generally will be limited to the cost of lodgings. 
However, certain expenses for meals, laundry, and cleaning of clothing 
may be allowed as provided in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (b) Determining allowable lodging costs--(1) Allowable costs for 
daily rentals. The same costs allowed in Sec. 301-7.9(c) for lodging 
facilities obtained in connection with temporary duty travel may be 
allowed for temporary living accommodations.
    (2) Allowable types of costs for other-than-daily rentals. When an 
eligible individual rents lodgings on an other-than-daily basis for 
temporary occupancy, the allowable costs shall be converted to a daily 
basis using the general guidelines under Sec. 301-7.14 which apply to 
lodgings obtained in connection with temporary duty travel.
    (c) Determining other allowable expenses. Costs of food, laundry, 
and cleaning of clothing are expenses incurred in day-to-day living. 
Such expenses should be considered the responsibility of the employee 
and normally will not be reimbursed. However, if temporary living 
accommodations do not contain cooking and/or laundry facilities, or 
other extenuating circumstances are present, certain of these expenses 
may be allowed to the extent determined appropriate by the agency.
    (d) Maximum allowable amount--(1) Method of computation. An agency 
may approve the actual amount of allowable expenses incurred in each 30-
day period (or fraction thereof) up to a maximum amount based on the 
daily limitations calculated under paragraph (d)(2) of this section 
multiplied by 30 (or the actual number of days used if fewer than 30). 
The daily actual subsistence expenses required to be itemized under 
paragraph (e) of this section, will be totaled for each 30-day period 
(or fraction thereof) and compared with the maximum allowable for the 
particular period as prescribed under paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
    (2) Daily limitations. The maximum amount of subsistence payments 
for each 30-day period (or fraction thereof) will be based on daily 
limitations calculated as provided in paragraphs (d)(2)(i) through (v) 
of this section. If subsistence payments are authorized only for lodging 
costs, the daily limitations shall be reduced appropriately.
    (i) For the employee, or for the unaccompanied spouse (one who 
necessarily occupies temporary accommodations without the employee or in 
a location separate from the employee), the daily limitation shall be an 
amount prescribed by the agency that shall not exceed the applicable 
maximum per diem rate prescribed under Sec. 301-7.3 for the location of 
the temporary living accommodations.

[[Page 74]]

    (ii) For the spouse accompanied by the employee, the daily 
limitation shall not exceed three-fourths of the employee's daily 
limitation.
    (iii) For each other member of the employee's immediate family who 
is 12 years of age or older, the daily limitation shall not exceed 
three-fourths of the daily limitation established for the employee or 
the unaccompanied spouse, as appropriate.
    (iv) For each member of the employee's immediate family who is under 
12 years of age, the daily limitation shall not exceed one-half of the 
daily limitation established for the employee or the unaccompanied 
spouse, as appropriate.
    (v) For each member of the immediate family who necessarily occupies 
temporary living accommodations without, or at a location separate from, 
either the employee or the spouse, the agency may, when the limitations 
stated in paragraphs (d)(2) (iii) and (iv) of this section are 
inadequate, establish an appropriate higher daily limitation, that is 
within the limitation prescribed in paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section.
    (e) Itemization and receipts. The actual expenses shall be itemized 
in a manner prescribed by the agency which will permit at a minimum a 
review of the amounts spent daily for (1) lodging, (2) meals, and (3) 
other allowable items of subsistence expenses. Receipts shall be 
required at least for lodging and for any other allowable expenses as 
required by the agency.

[54 FR 20297, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41534, 
Oct. 12, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 301-14.8  Transportation to and from a location away from the employee's designated post of duty.

    The agency may approve the payment of transportation expenses when a 
situation described in Sec. 301-14.1 requires the employee and/or 
members of the immediate family to be temporarily relocated to a place 
away from the employee's designated post of duty. Transportation to and 
from such location shall be in accordance with the governing provisions 
of parts 301-2 through 301-4 of this chapter unless the agency 
specifically approves a deviation from the rules for security reasons 
(see Sec. 301-10.2 regarding use of cash to procure transportation 
services in emergency circumstances). The documentation provisions of 
Sec. 301-14.9 govern in such instances.


<R05>
Sec. 301-14.9  Authorizations and payment of claims.

    Due to the unique nature of the situations covered under this part, 
agency heads shall establish specific administrative procedures for 
issuing authorizations and for payment of claims. In instances when 
documentation might compromise the security of the individuals involved, 
the head of the agency may waive all but absolutely essential 
documentation requirements.

[54 FR 20297, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28634, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-14.10  Advance of funds.

    Funds may be advanced for subsistence and transportation expenses 
covered under this part in accordance with Sec. 301-10.3. The advance of 
funds will be at intervals prescribed by the agency but for no more than 
a 30-day period at a time. The amount of the advance shall not exceed an 
amount based on the daily limitations established by the agency.

[54 FR 20297, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28634, 
June 26, 1992]


<R03>
PART 301-15--TRAVEL MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Subpart A--Use of Travel Agents and Travel Management Centers (TMC's) by 
                       Federal Executive Agencies

Sec.
301-15.1  Scope of subpart.
301-15.2  Applicability.
301-15.3  Authority to use travel agents.
301-15.4  Establishment of TMC'S.
301-15.5  TMC responsibilities.
301-15.6  GSA responsibilities.
301-15.7  Agency responsibilities.
301-15.8  Employee responsibilities.

   Subpart B--Use of Contract Airline/Rail Passenger Service Between 
                        Selected Cities/Airports

301-15.20  Scope of subpart.
301-15.21  Applicability.
301-15.22  Alternate use of noncontract rail or bus service.
301-15.23  Responsibility of awardees.

[[Page 75]]

301-15.24  Procedures for obtaining service.
301-15.25  Use of travel management centers (TMC's).
301-15.26  Progressive airline awards for the same city/airport pair.
301-15.27  Use of noncontract carriers for listed city/airport pairs.
301-15.28  Traveler liability.

Subpart C--Travel and Transportation Expense Payment System: Contractor-
 Issued Charge Cards, Centrally Billed Accounts, Travelers Checks, and 
                 Automated-Teller-Machine (ATM) Services

301-15.40  Scope of subpart.
301-15.41  Applicability.
301-15.42  Definitions.
301-15.43  Agency participation.
301-15.44  Individual employee charge cards.
301-15.45  Centrally billed accounts.
301-15.46  Travelers checks.
301-15.47  ATM services.
301-15.48  Additional agency guidance and information.

    Authority: Sec. 205 (c), Pub. L. 152, Ch. 288, 63 Stat. 390 (40 
U.S.C. 486(c)).

    Source: FTR Amdt. 9, 55 FR 10771, Mar. 23, 1990, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
Subpart A--Use of Travel Agents and Travel Management Centers (TMC's) by 
                       Federal Executive Agencies


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.1  Scope of subpart.

    (a) This subpart prescribes policies and procedures for the use of 
commercial travel agents to supply transportation and travel services 
for Federal employees or officers on official travel. It also provides 
for the establishment, control, and administration of travel management 
centers (TMC's) supplying these services to Federal agencies.
    (b) A TMC is a commercial travel office operated by a travel agent 
under contract with the General Services Administration (GSA). The 
Federal Travel Directory (FTD), published monthly by GSA and the 
Department of Defense (DOD), contains an up-to-date listing of TMC's. 
Federal agencies and employees should order copies of the FTD through 
their appropriate headquarters administrative offices. The FTD also is 
available from the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing 
Office, Washington, DC 20402. The publication stock number is 722-006-
00000-3.


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.2  Applicability.

    This subpart applies to all executive agencies as defined under 
section 3 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 
1949, as amended (40 U.S.C. 472).


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.3  Authority to use travel agents.

    (a) On May 25, 1984, the General Accounting Office removed the 
previous restrictions on the use of travel agents by Federal agencies.
    (b) The services of a travel agent may not be used by executive 
agencies except:
    (1) Through a TMC under contract to GSA;
    (2) Through delegation of authority, obtained from GSA where 
warranted; or
    (3) By exception as provided in Sec. 301-3.4(b).


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.4  Establishment of TMC's.

    (a) GSA contracts for TMC's in locations where the volume of travel 
justifies the need for such services. Generally, GSA will secure 
services through local travel agents. In the continental United States, 
areas with dispersed Federal employees or with a limited number of 
travel agents may be served by a TMC designated to provide Statewide 
service.
    (b) An agency's request to participate in the TMC program should be 
directed to the GSA Federal Supply Service Bureau, Traffic and Travel 
Services Zone Office, which has jurisdiction over the State where travel 
management services are required. Zone office locations and contacts are 
listed in the FTD.
    (c) GSA requires the following information for each agency location 
to be served:
    (1) The name and address of each agency location and the name and 
telephone number of an agency representative designated to act as 
liaison;
    (2) A per location estimate of official airline travel (number of 
tickets and total dollar cost) based on the prior year's travel records, 
and an estimate of the percentage of international travel, if any;
    (3) The number of Federal agency employees per location; and

[[Page 76]]

    (4) Any special travel requirements, such as a high percentage of 
complex international travel.


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.5  TMC responsibilities.

    Under the terms of a contract, a TMC is required to:
    (a) Comply with this subtitle and similar regulations as applicable, 
such as The Joint Federal Travel Regulations (JFTR), Volume 1 and the 
Uniform State/AID/USIA Foreign Service Travel Regulations (6 FAM 100);
    (b) Comply with all appropriate Federal travel programs, such as the 
GSA scheduled passenger transportation services contracts (see subpart B 
of this part), the GSA travel expense payment system (both individual 
and centrally billed accounts (see subpart C of this part)), and the 
Fly-America Act (49 U.S.C. App. 1517);
    (c) Provide a full range of services to assist the traveler or 
Federal agency (including airline, bus, steamship, or train reservations 
and ticketing; hotel and motel reservations; commercial auto rentals; 
assistance with visas and passports; and arranging conferences and 
seminars);
    (d) Deliver travel documents to designated control points for 
agencies' convenience;
    (e) Respond quickly when problems arise regarding changes in a 
traveler's itinerary; and
    (f) Provide appropriate management information reports which include 
all billing activity, summarize travel data, and confirm adherence to 
Federal travel policies.


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.6  GSA responsibilities.

    (a) The appropriate GSA Traffic and Travel Services Zone Office will 
promptly acknowledge receipt of each agency's request to participate in 
the TMC program. If further details are needed, meetings between GSA and 
agency liaison personnel will be arranged.
    (b) GSA will handle all required procurement processes, including 
solicitation development, selection of the successful bidder, and award 
and administration of the contract.
    (c) A GSA project coordinator will be appointed to act as the 
primary liaison between the requesting agency and the designated TMC.
    (d) GSA will assist agencies in developing a memorandum of 
understanding with the designated TMC.


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.7  Agency responsibilities.

    (a) Agencies may be requested to participate with GSA on a technical 
review panel to evaluate proposals from travel agents in the selection 
and evaluation process.
    (b) Agencies are required to comply with the terms of the GSA 
contract and may not make separate contractual agreements with TMC's.
    (c) It is the responsibility of the agency to prepare and finalize a 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) between the agency and the TMC 
contractor. The MOU should outline specific requirements and billing/
refund procedures which must be agreed to by both the contractor and 
GSA. The MOU should also include the following information for each 
agency location where the service will be performed:
    (1) The names and telephone numbers of agency liaison personnel 
designated to work locally with the TMC contractor and GSA project 
coordinator;
    (2) Specific ticket delivery locations or control points, including 
names and telephone numbers of personnel authorized to accept tickets; 
and
    (3) Any special or unusual agency travel policies or travel-related 
requirements.
    (d) Before TMC service is initiated, a participating agency must 
establish, as a minimum, certain internal procedures. The agency shall 
inform subordinate offices of these procedures. Since many agencies have 
numerous field offices participating in the program, it is recommended 
that agencies standardize the following:
    (1) Requirements for certification of official travel (for example, 
some agencies require that a copy of the travel authorization be 
exchanged for each ticket received at the point of delivery, while other 
agencies provide travelers with an accounting code to use when ordering 
tickets); and
    (2) Billing and payment procedures, including ticket refunds (for 
example,

[[Page 77]]

an agency with a national or centralized finance office may require 
field offices to return unused tickets to that office which will, in 
turn, make a request to the TMC for ticket refunds, rather than have 
field offices return tickets directly).
    (e) Transactions with a TMC are comparable to those made directly 
with a carrier. Therefore, transactions between the agency and the TMC 
are governed by applicable audit regulations. For example, when an 
agency uses Government Transportation Requests (GTR's), they shall be 
made out in the name of the TMC, not the carrier. Similarly, unused 
tickets purchased from the TMC shall be returned directly to the TMC for 
refunds.
    (f) Agencies will be requested to participate on a local oversight 
committee to review TMC performance, coordinate agency and TMC 
procedures, and provide GSA with requested information. Local oversight 
committee participation may be on a rotating or permanent basis.
    (g) Agencies shall remain responsible for employee compliance with 
this subtitle, including mandatory use of the contract air/rail carriers 
program (see subpart B of this part) and restrictions on premium-class 
air/rail travel (see Sec. 301-3.3 of this chapter).
    (h) Agencies shall comply with the Prompt Payment Act, as amended 
(31 U.S.C. 3901), and make timely payments to the TMC in accordance with 
the Act and Office of Management and Budget guidelines.

[FTR Amdt. 9, 55 FR 10771, Mar. 23, 1990, as amended at 58 FR 58242, 
Oct. 29, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.8  Employee responsibilities.

    Employees are not authorized to use a TMC unless their agency 
participates in GSA's TMC program and has established internal 
procedures for the use of the designated TMC (see Sec. 301-15.7(b)).


<R04>
   Subpart B--Use of Contract Airline/Rail Passenger Service Between 
                        Selected Cities/Airports


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.20  Scope of subpart.

    (a) This subpart prescribes policies and procedures governing the 
use of U.S. certificated air carriers and rail carriers which are under 
contract with the General Services Administration (GSA) to furnish 
Federal employees and other persons authorized to travel at Government 
expense with scheduled airline/rail passenger service between selected 
U.S. cities/airports and between selected U.S. and international cities/
airports at reduced fares. Carriers not under contract with GSA 
(referred to in this subpart as noncontract carriers) may be used 
between the selected cities/airports under conditions specified in 
Sec. 301-15.27.
    (b) The carriers under contract (referred to in this subpart as 
awardee(s)), the contract fares, and the selected city and airport pairs 
to which the contract fares apply are published in the Federal Travel 
Directory (FTD), a monthly publication to be used in conjunction with 
this subpart. Federal agencies and employees should order copies of the 
FTD through their appropriate headquarters administrative offices. The 
FTD also is available from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402. The publication stock 
number is 722-006-00000-3.


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.21  Applicability.

    (a) This subpart is mandatory for all executive agencies (except the 
Department of Defense (DOD)) and other Federal agencies subject to the 
authority of the Administrator of General Services under section 201 of 
the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949, as amended 
(40 U.S.C. 481) and 5 U.S.C. 5701 et seq. and 5721 et seq. (Uniformed 
members and civilian employees of DOD are subject to the procedures 
established in the Defense

[[Page 78]]

Traffic Management Regulation AR 55-355/NAVSUPINST 4600.70/AFR 75-2/MCO 
P4600.14B/DLAR 4500.3.)
    (b) The following persons are exempt from mandatory use of this 
subpart; however, they are authorized to obtain services under this 
subpart at the option of the awardees when seating space is available.
    (1) Uniformed members of the U.S. Coast Guard;
    (2) Members and employees of the U.S. Congress;
    (3) Employees of the judicial branch of the Government;
    (4) Employees of the U.S. Postal Service;
    (5) Foreign service officers;
    (6) Employees of any agency having independent statutory authority 
to prescribe travel allowances and who are not subject to the provisions 
of 5 U.S.C. 5701 through 5709; and
    (7) Contractors performing work under cost-reimbursable contracts or 
other eligible contracts as defined in 48 CFR part 51, including (but 
not limited to):
    (i) Contractors working under cost-reimbursable contracts or other 
types of contracts involving direct travel costs to the Government; or
    (ii) Contractors working for the Government at specific sites under 
nonprofit arrangements with the applicable contracting agency, and which 
are funded at such sites through Congressional appropriations (e.g., 
Government- owned, contractor operated (GOCO), federally funded research 
and development (FFRDC), or management and operating (M&O) contracts).

    Note: Each contracting agency is responsible for identifying 
contractor eligibility and authorization for GSA contract fares.


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.22  Alternate use of noncontract rail or bus service.

    Notwithstanding the provisions of this subpart, noncontract rail or 
bus service may be used when the agency determines that these modes are 
advantageous to the Government (cost, energy, and other factors 
considered) and compatible with the requirements of the travel mission. 
(See Sec. 301- 2.2(d)(1)(ii)(C).)


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.23  Responsibility of awardees.

    (a) Awardees are not required to furnish services if, at the time of 
the request for service, the scheduled carrier's conveyance is fully 
loaded; nor are awardees required to furnish any additional aircraft or 
railcars to satisfy the transportation requirement. Awardees will 
provide the official Government traveler with services that are the same 
as those provided to their commercial passengers in scheduled jet or 
rail coach service, subject to the rules and procedures published in 
tariffs filed with the Airline Tariff Publishing Company or contained in 
the awardees' contracts of carriage.
    (b) In describing unrestricted contract fares, awardees will use the 
designator ``YCA.'' Awardees will describe restricted contract fares by 
using a three-letter designator in which the last two characters will 
always consist of the letters ``CA''; e.g., ``QCA''.
    (c) Awardees will issue prepaid tickets at no charge to Federal 
agencies when such tickets are requested by the Government in accordance 
with the provisions of Sec. 301-15.24. This service, commonly known as 
prepaid ticket advice (PTA), includes notification between awardees' 
offices by electronic means or mail that a requestor in one location has 
purchased and requested issuance of prepaid transportation tickets to a 
person in another location. Generally, this service is used for Federal 
travelers who are located in remote areas or at long distances from 
airports or rail terminals and do not have immediate access to a ticket 
issuing facility. PTA service should not be used except where 
exceptional circumstances require use of such service.


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.24  Procedures for obtaining service.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraphs (b), (c), and (h) of this 
section, contract airline/rail passenger service shall be ordered by the 
issuance of a U.S. Government Transportation Request (GTR) (Standard 
Form 1169), either directly to awardees or indirectly to a travel 
management center (TMC) established by GSA as provided in subpart A of 
this part. (See Sec. 301-15.25 on the use of TMC's.)

[[Page 79]]

    (b) Agencies and departments participating in GSA's travel and 
transportation expense payment system are authorized to use GSA 
contractor-issued charge cards to the extent provided in subpart C of 
this part. The charge cards may be presented to awardees, TMC's, airline 
and AMTRAK ticket counters, or agency travel officers, as appropriate 
and in accordance with agency policies and procedures implementing the 
charge card program.
    (c) In limited circumstances when a traveler uses cash to procure 
service under 41 CFR 101-41.203-2, the traveler shall be prepared to 
authenticate the trip as official travel. When cash is used, the 
awardees listed in the FTD have the option of furnishing or not 
furnishing services at the contract fare. If only one contract is 
awarded for a city/airport pair and the awardee does not provide a 
contract fare with the use of cash, the traveler shall procure service 
from the awardee or a noncontract carrier offering the lowest fare. If 
more than one carrier has been awarded a contract for a city/airport 
pair, the traveler shall observe the order of awardee succession in 
selecting an awardee which provides a contract fare with the use of 
cash. If none of the awardees provides a contract fare with the use of 
cash, the traveler shall procure service from an awardee or noncontract 
carrier offering the lowest fare. Cash or personal credit cards may not 
be used to circumvent the Government's contracts.
    (d) When a reservation for contract service is requested, the fare 
basis shall be identified as ``YCA'' (unrestricted) or ``--CA'' 
(restricted), as appropriate, and the awardee's ticket agent shall be 
instructed to apply the appropriate fare basis and contract fare. 
Agencies using teletype ticketing equipment shall examine airline 
tickets to determine if the tickets contain the correct fare or whether 
they should be canceled and new tickets issued. Tickets picked up at the 
airline ticket office shall be verified to ensure that the proper fare 
is shown on the ticket.
    (e) Contract fares apply only for the city/airport pairs named in 
the FTD, and are not applicable to or from intermediate points. However, 
the contract fares are applicable in conjunction with other published 
fares or other contract fares. Contract fares shall not be used for 
personal travel taken in connection with official travel.
    (f) When a city/airport pair published in the FTD indicates that 
only one contract is awarded and the awardee subsequently offers a fare 
lower than its contract fare for the same service, the ordering agency 
may elect to use the lower fare. Promotional, restricted, and those 
special fares offered by the awardee and applicable only to Government 
employees on official travel (commonly known as status fares) may be 
used if the traveler can meet the qualifying restrictions to obtain such 
fares.
    (g) When the FTD indicates that separate contract fares apply for 
specific airports in selected cities served by more than one airport, 
travelers may (without further justification) use the airport which best 
suits their needs.
    (h) Eligible contractor employees (as defined in Sec. 301-
15.21(b)(7)), traveling in performance of a Government contract and with 
proper identification from the contracting agency, are authorized to 
obtain contract fares if the awardee agrees to the arrangement. Awardees 
may, at their option, require Government contractor employees to furnish 
a GTR or contract number for endorsement purposes in conjunction with 
payment by GTR, cash, or personal credit card. The FTD identifies those 
awardees which have agreed to furnish transportation services at the GSA 
contract fare to eligible Government contractors.


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.25  Use of travel management centers (TMC's).

    (a) TMC's are commercial offices operated by travel agents under 
contract with GSA. TMC's are responsible for providing and arranging all 
travel services required by the participating agencies. The FTD contains 
an up-to-date listing of TMC's.
    (b) When GTR's are used, the TMC's are assigned GTR numbers by each 
participating agency and these GTR numbers shall be shown on all 
transportation tickets issued.
    (c) When GSA contractor-issued charge cards or centrally billed 
accounts are used, travel management

[[Page 80]]

services will be furnished as provided in subpart C of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.26  Progressive airline awards for the same city/airport pair.

    When progressive awards are made for the same city/airport pair, the 
awardees are listed in the FTD in priority order from the awardee 
(primary) offering the lower YCA fare to the awardee (secondary) 
offering the next higher YCA fare. Except as otherwise provided in this 
section, agencies shall obtain contract services in the order of awardee 
priority specified in the FTD.
    (a) Where the awardee offers both a YCA fare and a restricted fare 
(e.g., QCA) for the same city/airport pair, the FTD lists both fares and 
describes the qualifying conditions for obtaining the restricted fare. 
The availability of a lower restricted fare by a secondary awardee does 
not remove the Government's obligation to request service from the 
primary awardee. Agencies may use the secondary awardee's restricted 
fare only if the exceptions noted in paragraph (b) of this section 
indicate that the use of the secondary awardee is justified. For 
example, if the primary awardee listed in the FTD offers a YCA fare of 
$90 and the secondary awardee offers a YCA fare of $100 and a QCA fare 
of $80, the QCA fare of $80 may be used only if the primary awardee with 
the lower YCA fare of $90 is displaced for reasons noted in paragraph 
(b) of this section.
    (b) The secondary awardee may be used when:
    (1) Seating space or the scheduled flight of the primary awardee is 
not available in time to accomplish the purpose of the travel, or the 
scheduled flight would require the traveler to incur unnecessary 
overnight lodging expense;
    (2) The primary awardee's flight schedule for the travel involved is 
inconsistent with the Government's policy of scheduling travel to the 
maximum extent practicable during normal working hours (see 5 CFR 
610.123); or
    (3) Based on a cost comparison, the primary awardee's fare, when 
added to such factors as ground transportation, lost productive time, 
allowable overtime, and additional overnight lodging expense, would 
result in higher costs to the Government than the costs resulting from 
the use of the secondary awardee.
    (c) When an awardee offers a commercial fare lower than its 
Government contract fare, the ordering agency may use the lower fare 
provided the qualifications for obtaining the lower fare are compatible 
with the agency's travel requirements and provided a cost comparison of 
total costs prescribed in paragraph (b)(3) of this section justifies a 
change in the order of awardee succession. By offering the general 
public a fare lower than its contract fare, the awardee assumes the 
status of a noncontract carrier and the provisions of Sec. 301-15.27 
apply.


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.27  Use of noncontract carriers for listed city/airport pairs.

    (a) Heads of agencies are authorized to approve the use of 
noncontract carriers for city/airport pairs listed in the FTD when their 
use is justified under the conditions specified in paragraph (b) of this 
section. This authority may be delegated provided appropriate guidelines 
in the form of regulations or other written instructions are furnished 
the designee. Redelegations of authority shall be limited. Delegation 
and redelegation of authority shall be held to as high an administrative 
level as practicable to ensure adequate consideration and review of the 
circumstances requiring the use of noncontract carriers. Justification 
for the use of noncontract carriers will be authorized on individual 
travel orders (if known before travel begins) or approved on vouchers 
(if not known before travel begins).
    (b) Use of noncontract carriers for city/airport pairs listed in the 
FTD is justified when:
    (1) Seating space or the scheduled service of the awardee is not 
available in time to accomplish the purpose of the travel, or the 
scheduled service would require the traveler to incur overnight lodging 
expense;
    (2) The awardee's schedule for the travel involved is inconsistent 
with the Government's policy of scheduling travel to the maximum extent 
practicable during normal working hours; or

[[Page 81]]

    (3) Based on a cost comparison (see paragraph (c) of this section),
    (i) A restricted or unrestricted coach fare available to the general 
public is lower than the contract fare or other fare offered by the 
awardee, all other cost factors being equal; or
    (ii) Use of a noncontract coach fare available to the general public 
would, when added to such factors as ground transportation, lost 
productive time, allowable overtime, and additional overnight lodging 
expense, result in lower costs to the Government than the costs that 
would accrue if comparable cost factors were added to the contract fare.
    (c) When making cost comparisons,
    (1) Discount fares such as YDG, MDG, or other fares restricted to 
Government employees may not be used.
    (2) Promotional/restricted fares offered by noncontract carriers to 
the general public may be used provided:
    (i) The traveler can meet all qualifying restrictions associated 
with such fares, and
    (ii) The service provided by the noncontract carrier is equal to or 
better than that of an awardee with respect to en route trip times.
    (3) Agencies should take into account any penalty fee a carrier may 
impose when reservations for promotional/restricted fares are canceled 
or changed.
    (d) The traveler and/or the traveler's agency, at the time 
reservations are made or travel is performed (whichever occurs first), 
shall demonstrate that the awardee did not offer the same fare cited in 
the cost comparison. Justification for using the noncontract carrier 
shall be shown on the travel authorization or travel voucher, as 
provided in paragraph (a) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.28  Traveler liability.

    In the absence of specific authorization or approval stated on or 
attached to the travel authorization or travel voucher, a civilian 
traveler shall be responsible for any difference in the cost that may 
result from the traveler's unauthorized use of noncontract service or 
the failure to observe the order of awardee succession. The traveler's 
indebtedness to the Government shall be the difference between the price 
of the service used and the lowest contract fare applicable to the 
travel involved. The entitlement of a uniformed services traveler who 
fails to use directed Government-procured transportation shall be as 
specified in the Joint Federal Travel Regulations, Volume 1.


<R04>
Subpart C--Travel and Transportation Expense Payment System: Contractor-
 Issued Charge Cards, Centrally Billed Accounts, Travelers Checks, and 
                 Automated-Teller-Machine (ATM) Services


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.40  Scope of subpart.

    This subpart prescribes policies and procedures governing the use of 
the General Services Administration (GSA) travel and transportation 
expense payment system. GSA has contracted for the issuance and 
maintenance of individual contractor-issued charge cards, the 
establishment of centrally billed accounts, the issuance of travelers 
checks, and the provision of automated-teller-machine (ATM) services. 
The GSA travel and transportation expense program includes provisions 
for the following:
    (a) Individual employee charge cards used to pay for major travel 
and transportation expenses; i.e., passenger transportation tickets, 
vehicle rental charges, lodging, meals, etc. (see Sec. 301-15.44);
    (b) Centrally billed accounts used by designated agency offices 
primarily for the purchase of passenger transportation services (see 
Sec. 301-15.45);
    (c) Travelers checks (or cash) used for other expenses; i.e., 
laundry, parking, local transportation, or tips (see Sec. 301-15.46); 
and
    (d) ATM access at locations throughout the United States and 
worldwide (see Sec. 301-15.47).

[FTR Amdt. 9, 55 FR 10771, Mar. 23, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 12, 55 
FR 49895, Dec. 3, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.41  Applicability.

    This subpart applies to Federal agencies and departments that 
participate in GSA's travel and transportation expense payment system 
providing for

[[Page 82]]

contractor-issued charge cards, centrally billed accounts, travelers 
checks, and ATM services.

[FTR Amdt. 12, 55 FR 49895, Dec. 3, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.42  Definitions.

    For the purposes of this subpart the following definitions apply:
    (a) Automated-teller-machine (ATM) services are contractor-provided 
ATM services which allow cash withdrawals from participating ATM's to be 
charged to a contractor-issued charge card (see paragraph (c) of this 
section).
    (b) Centrally billed means a Government Travel System account 
established by the charge card contractor at the request of a 
participating agency.
    (c) Charge card means a contractor-issued charge card to be used by 
travelers of a participating agency to pay for passenger transportation 
services, subsistence expenses, and other allowable travel and 
transportation expenses incurred in connection with official travel.
    (d) Federal Travel Directory (FTD) means a monthly publication 
issued by GSA and the Department of Defense to provide up-to-date 
information on charge cards, contract fares, lodging rates, car rental, 
per diem rates, travel management centers, and other travel and 
transportation matters. Federal agencies and employees should order 
copies of the FTD through their appropriate headquarters administrative 
offices. The FTD also is available from the Superintendent of Documents, 
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402. The publication 
stock number is 722-006-00000-3.
    (e) Participating agency means an agency or department that 
participates in GSA's travel and transportation expense payment system.
    (f) Travel Management Center (TMC) means a commercial travel firm 
under contract to GSA that provides reservations, ticketing, and related 
travel management services for official travelers.
    (g) Travelers checks are contractor-issued travelers checks.

[FTR Amdt. 12, 55 FR 49895, Dec. 3, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.43  Agency participation.

    (a) Agencies or departments desiring to participate in the travel 
and transportation expense payment program should contact the General 
Services Administration, Attn: Transportation Management Division (FBX), 
Washington, DC 20406.
    (b) The agency headquarters office must approve participation in the 
program. Interested offices within the participating agency shall 
contact their local administrative or travel office to arrange 
initiation into this program.
    (1) The charge card contractor will issue charge cards and establish 
centrally billed accounts only upon the request of authorized 
representatives of participating agencies.
    (2) The charge card contractor will provide ATM services to 
cardholders who are specifically authorized by their agencies to use ATM 
services. To participate in the ATM program, agencies must perform a 
cost benefit analysis, determine whether the program will be 
advantageous, and develop program controls. Agencies must provide the 
GSA contracting officer a copy of the cost benefit analysis and a 
certification signed by the head of the agency or his/her designee 
stating that the ATM program is expected to be advantageous to the 
agency.

[FTR Amdt. 9, 55 FR 10771, Mar. 23, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 12, 55 
FR 49896, Dec. 3, 1990; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28634, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.44  Individual employee charge cards.

    (a) Authority. Under 41 CFR 101-41.203, Federal agencies 
historically used a U.S. Government Transportation Request (GTR), SF 
1169, to purchase passenger transportation services directly from a 
common carrier or through a commercial travel agent under contract to 
GSA (see subpart A of this part). Authority to deviate from 41 CFR 101-
41.203 was granted by the Administrator of General Services on August 4, 
1983, thus allowing eligible individuals to participate in the charge 
card program.

[[Page 83]]

    (b) Issuing charge cards. Participating agencies shall determine and 
name employees who may be issued an individual employee charge card. The 
employees will be requested to complete an employee card account 
application for agency approval and submission to the contractor. The 
charge card is issued directly to the employee in his or her name. The 
charge card contractor mails charge cards to authorized individuals or 
to requesting agency offices. Cost-reimbursable contractors are not 
eligible to use the charge card.
    (c) Use of charge cards. (1) The employee shall use the charge card 
issued under this program only to charge expenses incurred in 
conjunction with official travel or to obtain authorized ATM cash 
withdrawals (see Sec. 301-15.47). The employee shall use the charge card 
to pay for official travel expenses to the maximum extent possible. 
There is no preset limit on the expenses which can be charged to the 
charge cards; however, ATM withdrawals are limited to the amounts stated 
in the ATM cardmember agreement and the employee's travel authorization. 
Although the employee is liable for payment of all charges incurred, 
including those for ATM withdrawals, the employee shall be reimbursed by 
his/her agency for all authorized and allowable travel and 
transportation expenses. However, employees are cautioned that charges 
in excess of authorized and allowable travel and transportation expenses 
(i.e., lodging and meal costs which exceed authorized amounts) are the 
financial responsibility of the employee and are not reimbursable. Use 
of the charge card (including use of the card to obtain an ATM cash 
withdrawal) does not relieve the employee of the responsibility to 
employ prudent travel practices and to observe rules and regulations 
governing official travel as set forth in this subtitle and implementing 
agency regulations.
    (2) The charge card may be used to pay for passenger transportation 
services (including those services offered by carriers under contract to 
GSA) at the transportation carrier's ticket counter, TMC, or agency 
travel office, as appropriate, under the participating agency's policies 
and procedures. Agencies may elect to prohibit employees from using the 
charge card to purchase services directly from a carrier. The charge 
card shall not be used to procure travel and transportation services 
from commercial travel agencies that are not under contract to the 
Government to provide such services to the Government traveler.
    (d) Monthly contractor bills and payments. The terms of the contract 
with the charge card contractor require billing and payment to be 
performed in the following manner. The contractor bills charges directly 
to the individual employee each month. Charges billed to the individual 
employee are due and must be paid in full within 25 calendar days of the 
billing date. There are no interest or late charges, and extended or 
partial payment is not permitted. Questions concerning billings and 
payments should be directed to the charge card contractor at the toll 
free telephone numbers published in the FTD.
    (e) Travel voucher claims--(1) Preparing and submitting travel 
vouchers. Upon completing official travel, the employee must prepare and 
submit a travel voucher in the usual manner, together with any required 
receipts, to the appropriate finance or paying office. The employee is 
reimbursed for travel and transportation expenses authorized and 
allowable under this subtitle and agency policies and procedures. 
Participating agencies shall process travel vouchers within the time 
limits prescribed in Sec. 301-10.1(b)(3).
    (2) Unused transportation tickets. Unused or partially unused 
tickets purchased with individual cards shall be returned to a TMC or 
carrier and a refund credit receipt obtained. Unused tickets that have 
been prepaid for pickup at the airport must be refunded by the airline 
upon whose ticket stock the ticket was issued. The employee may claim 
reimbursement on the travel voucher only for the cost of the tickets 
actually used. Refunds for unused tickets will be credited to the 
employee's account. The unused tickets shall not be submitted with the 
travel voucher.
    (3) Transportation charges and assignment of rights. Use of charge 
cards for purchase of passenger transportation services is considered to 
be a cash purchase. Travel vouchers submitted for

[[Page 84]]

reimbursement of transportation purchased with charge cards must include 
a statement which assigns to the United States all rights which the 
traveler has in connection with recovery of overcharges from the 
carrier(s). This statement is preprinted on the SF 1012, and must be 
initialed by the employee when claiming reimbursement for transportation 
expenses. Employees using agency travel vouchers under approved 
exceptions to the SF 1012 must add this statement (see Sec. 301-
11.5(c)(3) for statement) if it is not preprinted on the voucher.
    (f) Charge card cancellation and suspension. Charge cards may be 
canceled by the employee, the participating agency, or the charge card 
contractor. Cancellations may be accomplished by telephone notification 
with subsequent written confirmation to the charge card contractor. The 
charge card contractor may cancel an employee's card when the 
contractor's statement has not been paid in full 120 calendar days after 
the date the statement was issued. The contractor may suspend an 
employee's card when the contractor's statement has not been paid in 
full 60 calendar days after the date the statement was issued. In either 
event, the contractor will cancel or suspend an employee's card only on 
notification to and with the concurrence of the participating agency.
    (g) Lost or stolen charge cards. An employee is not responsible for 
any charges incurred against a lost or stolen card provided the employee 
promptly reports loss of the card to the contractor under the terms of 
the cardmember agreement signed by the employee when the charge card was 
issued. Employees may call 24 hours a day to report lost or stolen 
charge cards. The toll free telephone numbers are published in the FTD.
    (h) Financial obligations/liability. Except for charges accrued 
against promptly reported lost or stolen cards, employees with charge 
cards are liable for all billed charges. (See paragraphs (c) and (g) of 
this section.) Government employees must pay their just financial debts 
under section 206 of Executive Order 11222 (May 8, 1965) and Office of 
Personnel Management Regulations, 5 CFR 735.207. At the request of the 
contractor, Federal agencies and departments, without Government 
liability, may assist in collecting delinquent employee accounts after 
60 calendar days. The Government assumes no liability for charges 
incurred on employee charge cards (including charges relating to ATM 
withdrawals), nor is the Government liable for lost or stolen charge 
cards.

[FTR Amdt. 9, 55 FR 10771, Mar. 23, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 12, 55 
FR 49896, Dec. 3, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.45  Centrally billed accounts.

    (a) Establishment. Participating agencies may establish centrally 
billed accounts with the contractor for one or more designated offices 
within the agency primarily to purchase transportation services for 
groups or for infrequent travelers; i.e., employees not designated to 
receive individual cards. Agencies shall ensure that only authorized 
personnel use the accounts and that all tickets purchased are 
authorized. Charge cards are not issued for centrally billed accounts.
    (b) Use of centrally billed accounts. Centrally billed accounts may 
be used only if agencies use a TMC or agency travel office. They are 
intended principally to supplement the individual card, rather than as 
the sole means of purchasing transportation tickets for all agency 
employees.
    (c) Contractor billing and payment. Consolidated contractor airline 
ticket charges accrued through use of centrally billed accounts shall be 
billed monthly to the agency's finance and paying office. Expenses 
billed monthly against centrally billed accounts are paid to the 
contractor. Monthly payment of charges incurred through the use of 
centrally billed accounts is subject to the provisions of the Prompt 
Payment Act, as amended (31 U.S.C. 3901), and charges billed to agency 
offices are due in full within 30 calendar days of the billing date.
    (d) Travel voucher claims--(1) Preparation and submission of travel 
vouchers. Upon completing official travel, the employee shall prepare 
and submit a travel voucher in the usual manner, together with any 
required receipts, to the finance and paying office, to be reimbursed.

[[Page 85]]

    (2) Unused transportation tickets. The employee shall submit to the 
appropriate agency office all unused transportation tickets (wholly or 
partially unused) purchased under a centrally billed account. In turn, 
the agency shall return the unused tickets to the TMC through use of the 
SF 1170, Redemption of Unused Tickets, and maintain a copy of the SF 
1170 on file until the credit appears as an adjustment to the agency's 
bill from the TMC. Policies and procedures regarding the use of the SF 
1170 are provided in 41 CFR subpart 101-41.2.
    (e) Financial obligations/liability. The Government is liable only 
for authorized charges incurred in conjunction with official travel on 
centrally billed accounts.

[FTR Amdt. 9, 55 FR 10771, Mar. 23, 1990, as amended by FTR Amdt. 12, 55 
FR 49896, Dec. 3, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.46  Travelers checks.

    (a) Travelers checks issued under this program are available to 
participating agencies in a wide range of denominations. Specific 
arrangements for issuing, shipping, and paying for bulk stocks of 
travelers checks are made between the travelers check contractor and the 
participating agency.
    (b) Lost or stolen travelers checks shall be promptly reported by 
telephone to the travelers check contractor. Employees may call 24 hours 
a day to report lost or stolen travelers checks and to obtain refund 
information. The toll free telephone numbers are published in the FTD.


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.47  ATM services.

    (a) Enrollment in the ATM program. Participating agencies shall 
determine which employees may enroll in the ATM program. Enrollment in 
the program is limited to employees whose charge card accounts are in a 
current status. The employees will be requested to complete an 
enrollment form for agency approval and submission to the contractor. 
Each employee will receive a personal identification number (PIN) which 
will be valid approximately ten days after the mailing of the PIN by the 
contractor.
    (b) Use of ATM services. When authorized, the charge card may be 
used to obtain cash travel advances at ATM's worldwide. The employee 
must be enrolled in the ATM program and have received a PIN in order to 
obtain an advance. The charge card contractor will bill the amount of 
the withdrawal and the applicable transaction charge to the employee. An 
employee may not withdraw any amount unless authorized to do so. 
Furthermore, withdrawals may not exceed any limitations on advances 
stated on the employee's travel authorization. The use of cash withdrawn 
from an ATM is subject to all applicable regulations of the 
participating agency with respect to travel advances.
    (c) Cancellation and suspension of ATM privileges. An employee's ATM 
privileges may be canceled by the employee, the participating agency, or 
the charge card contractor. Cancellation by an employee or participating 
agency may be accomplished by telephone notification with subsequent 
written confirmation to the charge card contractor. The contractor may 
cancel an employee's privileges only upon notifying and obtaining the 
concurrence of the participating agency. The charge card contractor will 
automatically suspend an employee's ATM privileges when the contractor's 
statement has not been paid in full within 60 calendar days of the 
billing date on the billing statement. Additionally, the contractor may 
suspend or cancel an employee's card if (after contacting the 
participating agency) the contractor reasonably believes that the 
employee has made an unauthorized withdrawal or withdrawals. Finally, an 
employee's ATM privileges are automatically canceled upon the 
cancellation of his or her card.

[FTR Amdt. 12, 55 FR 49896, Dec. 3, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 301-15.48  Additional agency guidance and information.

    (a) Purchasing passenger transportation. (1) Passenger 
transportation services procured with contractor-issued charge cards 
under this payment system are not subject to the cash limitation 
established by the Administrator of General Services at 41 CFR 41.203-2. 
Any credit card other than the contractor-issued charge card and all

[[Page 86]]

travelers checks used to purchase passenger transportation services 
shall be considered the equivalent of cash and subject to the cash 
limitation provisions of 41 CFR 101-41.203-2.
    (2) A portion of the charge card application form is to be used to 
record the standard Federal organization code(s) contained in the 
Department of Commerce/National Institute of Standards and Technology 
publication, Codes for the Identification of Federal and Federally 
Assisted Organizations (FIPS PUB 95). Specific details concerning this 
requirement will be communicated by the charge card contractor directly 
to each participating agency.
    (b) Submitting passenger ticketing information to GSA for audit. (1) 
Travel vouchers containing reimbursable transportation charges purchased 
with contractor-issued charge cards shall not be considered 
transportation vouchers under 41 CFR 101-41.807.
    (2) Passenger ticketing information is furnished directly by the 
charge card contractor to GSA's Office of Transportation Audits. It is 
used to identify and collect carrier overcharges.
    (c) Examination of payments and collection. The Transportation Act 
of 1940, as amended (31 U.S.C. 3726), authorizes the GSA Transportation 
Audit Division (see 41 CFR 101-41.102) to issue a notice of overcharge 
when GSA finds that a carrier has been overpaid for the services 
rendered.
    (1) Under the provisions of 41 CFR subpart 101-41.5, carriers are 
requested to promptly refund amounts due the United States. Refund 
checks are to be made payable to the General Services Administration and 
promptly mailed to the General Services Administration, P.O. Box 93746, 
Chicago, IL 60673. Payment or credit to the contractor is not considered 
proper payment of overcharge claims due the U.S. Government.
    (2) Protests to notices of overcharge are handled and processed in 
accordance with 41 CFR 101-41.503.
    (3) Collection of unrefunded overcharges owed to the U.S. Government 
are processed in accordance with 41 CFR 101-41.504.
    (4) Debts collected by GSA based on audits of transportation 
accounts are deposited to miscellaneous receipts, U.S. Treasury.
    (5) Claims against the United States related to the actions taken 
above are processed under 41 CFR subpart 101-41.6.
    (6) Reconsideration and review of GSA transportation claim 
settlements follow the provisions of 41 CFR subpart 101-41.7.
    (d) Employee training. Participating agencies shall ensure that each 
of their eligible employees is adequately trained in the use of the 
contractor-issued charge card, centrally billed account, or ATM services 
before allowing them to use these services.

[FTR Amdt. 9, 55 FR 10771, Mar. 23, 1990. Redesignated and amended by 
FTR Amdt. 12, 55 FR 49896, Dec. 3, 1990]


<R03>
PART 301-16--CONFERENCE PLANNING--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
301-16.1  Policy.
301-16.2  Definitions.
301-16.3  Authorization of Government sponsorship or co-sponsorship of a 
          conference.
301-16.4  Selection of a conference site.
301-16.5  Selection of conference attendees.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5701-5709; E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13747, 3 CFR, 1971-
1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58242, Oct. 29, 1993, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R05>
Sec. 301-16.1  Policy.

    It is the policy of the Government that agencies shall exercise 
strict fiscal responsibility by selecting conference sites that minimize 
conference administrative costs (as defined in Sec. 301-16.2(b) of this 
part), conference attendees' travel costs (as defined in Sec. 301-
16.2(c) of this part), and conference attendees' time costs (as defined 
in Sec. 301-16.2(d) of this part). It also is the policy of the 
Government that agencies shall minimize conference attendees' travel 
costs by authorizing the minimum number of attendees necessary to 
accomplish the agency's goals.


<R05>
Sec. 301-16.2  Definitions.

    (a) Conference. The term ``conference'' means a meeting, retreat, 
seminar, symposium, or similar event that involves attendee travel. The 
term

[[Page 87]]

``conference'' also means a training activity that involves attendee 
travel when the training activity is considered a conference under 
Chapter 410 of the Federal Personnel Manual (Copies may be obtained from 
the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, 
DC 20402.) and its accompanying instructional letters.
    (b) Conference administrative costs. The term ``conference 
administrative costs'' includes the cost of conference facilities, 
registration fees, speaker fees, and conference-related administrative 
fees paid by the Government for a conference, whether paid directly by 
agencies or reimbursed by agencies to travelers or others associated 
with the conference.
    (c) Conference attendees' travel costs. The term ``conference 
attendees' travel costs'' includes attendees' subsistence expenses 
(including lodging and meals and incidental expenses (M&IE)) and 
transportation costs authorized at Government expense.
    (d) Conference attendees' time costs. The term ``conference 
attendees' time costs'' means the cost of employees' time spent at the 
conference (including time spent while performing en route travel during 
normal duty hours).
    (e) Conference site. For purposes of this part, the term 
``conference site'' means the locality or geographic area where the 
conference is held.
    (f) Conference facilities. For purposes of this part, the term 
``conference facilities'' means the meeting rooms and lodging 
accommodations where the conference is conducted.

[FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58242, Oct. 29, 1993, as amended by FTR Amdt. 39, 
59 FR 46194, Sept. 7, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 301-16.3  Authorization of Government sponsorship or co-sponsorship of a conference.

    (a) General. A senior agency official shall authorize Government 
sponsorship or co-sponsorship of a conference which involves travel by 
30 or more employees.
    (b) Prohibition on use of a place of public accommodation that is 
not an approved accommodation--(1) General rule. As provided in 15 
U.S.C. 2225a, an agency, as defined in Sec. 301-17.2(a) of this chapter, 
may not sponsor or fund in whole or in part a conference in any State, 
as defined in Sec. 301-17.2(f) of this chapter, at a place of public 
accommodation that is not an approved accommodation as defined in 
Sec. 301-17.2(c) of this chapter, unless a waiver is granted under 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section. This prohibition also applies to 
Federal funds expended by the government of the District of Columbia.
    (2) Waiver of the prohibition on scheduling a conference at a place 
of public accommodation that is not an approved accommodation. An 
agency, as defined in Sec. 301-17.2(a) of this chapter, may sponsor or 
fund in whole or in part a conference in any State, as defined in 
Sec. 301-17.2(f) of this chapter, at a place of public accommodation 
that is not an approved accommodation when the agency head waives the 
prohibition in paragraph (b)(1) of this section based on his/her written 
determination that such waiver is necessary in the public interest for a 
particular event. The agency head may delegate the authority to waive 
the prohibition in paragraph (b)(1) of this section to a senior level 
official if such official is given the authority with respect to all 
conferences sponsored or funded by the agency.
    (3) Requirement to include prohibition notice on advertisements and 
applications for attendance at a conference. As required by 15 U.S.C. 
2225a, any advertisement or application for attendance at a conference 
sponsored or funded in whole or in part by an agency in any State, as 
defined in Sec. 301-17.2(f) of this chapter, shall include a notice of 
the prohibition contained in paragraph (b)(1) of this section on holding 
a conference at a place of public accommodation that is not an approved 
accommodation. An agency shall not be required to include notice of the 
prohibition in any advertisement or application for attendance at a 
conference, however, when the agency head, or his/her designee, waives 
the prohibition in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (4) Notification to non-Federal entities receiving Federal funds of 
the prohibition on scheduling a conference at a place of public 
accommodation that is not an approved accommodation. As provided in 15 
U.S.C. 2225a, an Executive agency, as defined in 5 U.S.C. 105, which 
provides

[[Page 88]]

Federal funds to a non-Federal entity shall notify the non-Federal 
entity receiving such funds of the prohibition contained in paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section.

[FTR Amdt. 39, 59 FR 46194, Sept. 7, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 301-16.4  Selection of a conference site.

    (a) Agency responsibilities--(1) Agency policy. Each agency shall 
establish policies governing conference site selection that minimize 
conference administrative costs and conference attendees' travel costs 
to be paid by the Government, as well as conference attendees' time 
costs. Agencies should use Government-owned or Government-provided 
conference facilities to the maximum extent possible, and generally 
should avoid consideration of conference sites that might appear 
extravagant to the public. However, when a true cost savings would 
accrue to the Government in the selection of a particular conference 
site (e.g., through the availability of attractive and competitive rates 
during the off-season in areas having seasonal rates), agencies should 
avail themselves of the opportunity to save costs in selecting a 
conference site.
    (2) Authorization of conference site selection. The authorization to 
conduct a conference at a selected site when the conference involves 
travel by 30 or more employees must be granted by a senior agency 
official.
    (b) Documentation. When a conference involves travel by 30 or more 
employees, the agency shall document the cost of each alternative 
conference site, and retain a record of the documentation for every 
conference held. The agency shall make the documentation available for 
inspection by the agency's Office of Inspector General or other 
interested parties.
    (c) Restrictions on selection of conference facilities--(1) Approved 
accommodations. When an agency, as defined in Sec. 301-17.2(a) of this 
chapter, holds a conference at a place of public accommodation, as 
defined in Sec. 301-17.2(b) of this chapter, the agency shall use an 
approved accommodation as defined in Sec. 301-17.2(c) of this chapter 
unless a waiver is granted under Sec. 301-16.3(b)(2) of this part. Any 
advertisement or application for attendance at the conference shall 
include notice of the prohibition on using a place of public 
accommodation that is not an approved accommodation in accordance with 
Sec. 301-16.3(b) of this part. In addition, any Executive agency as 
defined in 5 U.S.C. 105 shall notify all non-Federal entities to which 
it provides Federal funds of the prohibition.
    (2) Conferences within the District of Columbia. Agencies may obtain 
short-term conference meeting space in the District of Columbia in 
accordance with 41 CFR 101-17.101-4. Direct procurement by an agency of 
lodging facilities in the District of Columbia without specific 
authorization and appropriation by the Congress is prohibited (see 40 
U.S.C. 34). The provisions of this paragraph shall not be construed to 
prohibit payment of per diem to an employee who is authorized to obtain 
lodging in the District of Columbia while performing official business 
travel.

[FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58242, Oct. 29, 1993; 58 FR 60390, Nov. 16, 1993, 
as amended by FTR Amdt. 39, 59 FR 46195, Sept. 7, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 301-16.5  Selection of conference attendees.

    (a) Agency responsibilities--(1) Agency policies and procedures. 
Each agency shall establish policies and procedures designed to reduce 
the overall cost of attending conferences. The agency policy and 
procedures shall:
    (i) Limit agency attendance to the minimum number of attendees 
necessary for accomplishment of the agency's mission; and
    (ii) Provide for consideration of travel expenses when selecting 
attendees.
    (2) Authorization of attendance. A senior agency official shall 
authorize all employee conference attendance to be performed at 
Government expense.
    (b) Per diem. Per diem is intended only to reimburse the attendee's 
individual subsistence expenses. Conference administrative costs are to 
be paid separately, and are not to be included in the attendee's 
subsistence reimbursement.

[[Page 89]]


<R03>
PART 301-17--AGENCY TRAVEL DATA REQUIREMENTS--Table of Contents

<R05>


            Subpart A--Approved Accommodations Data Reporting

Sec.
301-17.1  Applicability.
301-17.2  Definitions.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5707.

    Source: FTR Amdt. 39, 59 FR 46195, Sept. 7, 1994, unless otherwise 
noted.

            Subpart A--Approved Accommodations Data Reporting


<R05>
Sec. 301-17.1  Applicability.

    (a) This part applies to Federal agencies as defined in Sec. 301-
17.2(a) of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 301-17.2  Definitions.

    For purposes of this part, the following definitions apply:

    (a) Agency. ``Agency'' has the same meaning it is given in Sec. 301-
1.3(c)(1) of this chapter except it does not include the government of 
the District of Columbia.
    (b) Place of public accommodation affecting commerce. ``Place of 
public accommodation affecting commerce'' means any inn, hotel, or other 
establishment within a State that provides lodging to transient guests, 
except that such term does not include:

    (1) An establishment owned by the Federal Government;
    (2) An establishment treated as an apartment building for purposes 
of any State or local law or regulation; or
    (3) An establishment located within a building that contains not 
more than 5 rooms for rent or hire and that is actually occupied as a 
residence by the proprietor of such establishment.
    (c) Approved accommodation. ``Approved accommodation'' means any 
place of public accommodation that meets the requirements of the fire 
prevention and control guidelines in 15 U.S.C. 2225. (A master list of 
all approved accommodations is compiled, periodically updated, and 
published in the Federal Register by the Director of the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency. The statute (5 U.S.C. 5707a(b)) requires 
that the General Services Administration list only approved 
accommodations in any directory listing public accommodations.)
    (d) Employee. ``Employee'' has the same meaning it is given in 
Sec. 301-1.3(c)(2) of this chapter and in Sec. 302-1.4(c) of chapter 302 
of this title, and does not include an interviewee as defined in 
Sec. 301-1.3(c)(3) of this chapter.
    (e) State. ``State'' means any State, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the Virgin Islands, 
the Canal Zone, Guam, American Samoa, or any other U.S. territory or 
possession.

[FTR Amdt. 39, 59 FR 46195, Sept. 7, 1994, as amended by FTR Amdt. 53; 
61 FR 64998, Dec. 10, 1996


<R04>
                          Subpart B--[Reserved]

  Appendix A To Chapter 301-Prescribed Maximum Per Diem Rates for CONUS

    The maximum rates listed below are prescribed under Sec. 301-7.3(a) 
of this chapter for reimbursement of per diem expenses incurred during 
official travel within CONUS (the continental United States). The amount 
shown in column (a) is the maximum that will be reimbursed for lodging 
expenses including applicable taxes. The M&IE rate shown in column (b) 
is a fixed amount allowed for meals and incidental expenses covered by 
per diem. The per diem payment calculated in accordance with part 301-7 
of this chapter for lodging expenses plus the M&IE rate may not exceed 
the maximum per diem rate shown in column (c). Seasonal rates apply 
during the periods indicated.

[[Page 90]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Per diem locality: Key city,<SUP>1 County and/or     Maximum lodging                               Maximum per diem
          other defined location <SUP>2, <SUP>3               amount  (a)      +    M&IE rate  (b)    =     rate <SUP>4  (c)   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONUS, Standard rate...........................                $50                    $30                    $80
    (Applies to all locations within CONUS not                                                                  
     specifically listed below or encompassed                                                                   
     by the boundary definition of a listed                                                                     
     point. However, the standard CONUS rate                                                                    
     applies to all locations within CONUS,                                                                     
     including those defined below, for certain                                                                 
     relocation subsistence allowances. See                                                                     
     parts 302-2, 302-4, and 302-5 of this                                                                      
     subtitle.)                                                                                                 
Alabama:                                                                                                        
    Birmingham, Jefferson......................                 55                     38                     93
    Gulf Shores, Baldwin:                                                                                       
        (May 1-September 30)...................                102                     34                    136
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 73                     34                    107
    Huntsville, Madison........................                 61                     34                     95
    Mobile, Mobile.............................                 56                     38                     94
    Montgomery, Montgomery.....................                 56                     30                     86
Arizona:                                                                                                        
    Casa Grande, Pinal:                                                                                         
        (January 1-April 30)...................                 55                     30                     85
        (May 1-December 31)....................                 50                     30                     80
    Chinle, Apache:                                                                                             
        (April 1-October 31)...................                 83                     30                    113
        (November 1-March 31)..................                 63                     30                     93
    Flagstaff, All points in Coconino County                                                                    
     not covered under Grand Canyon per diem                                                                    
     area:                                                                                                      
        (April 1-October 31)...................                 79                     34                    113
        (November 1-March 31)..................                 60                     34                     94
    Grand Canyon, all points in the Grand                                                                       
     Canyon National Park and Kaibab National                                                                   
     Forest within Coconino County.............                105                     38                    143
    Kayenta, Navajo:                                                                                            
        (April 1-October 31)...................                 93                     30                    123
        (November 1-March 31)..................                 62                     30                     92
    Phoenix/Scottsdale, Maricopa:                                                                               
        (October 1-May 14).....................                105                     38                    143
        (May 15-September 30)..................                 65                     38                    103
    Prescott, Yavapai..........................                 54                     34                     88
    Tucson, Pima County; Davis Monthan AFB:                                                                     
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 77                     34                    111
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 61                     34                     95
    Yuma, Yuma.................................                 64                     30                     94
Arkansas:                                                                                                       
    Hot Springs, Garland.......................                 59                     30                     89
    Little Rock, Pulaski.......................                 65                     30                     95
California:                                                                                                     
    Clearlake, Lake:                                                                                            
        (April 1-September 30).................                 61                     34                     95
        (October 1-March 31)...................                 52                     34                     86
    Death Valley, Inyo.........................                 93                     42                    135
    Eureka, Humboldt:                                                                                           
        (May 15-October 14)....................                 67                     34                    101
        (October 15-May 14)....................                 56                     34                     90
    Fresno, Fresno.............................                 68                     34                    102

[[Page 91]]

                                                                                                                
    Gualala/Point Area, Mendocina..............                124                     42                    166
    Los Angeles, Los Angeles, Kern, Orange and                                                                  
     Ventura Counties; Edwards AFB; Naval                                                                       
     Weapons Center and Ordnance Test Station,                                                                  
     China Lake................................                 97                     42                    139
    Mammoth Lakes/Bridgeport, Mono:                                                                             
        (November 1-April 30)..................                 72                     42                    114
        (May 1-October 31).....................                 59                     42                    101
    Merced, Merced.............................                 54                     34                     88
    Modesto, Stanislaus........................                 58                     34                     92
    Monterey, Monterey:                                                                                         
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 79                     38                    117
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 71                     38                    109
    Napa, Napa:                                                                                                 
        (April 1-October 31)...................                 83                     42                    125
        (November 1-March 31)..................                 76                     42                    118
    Oakhurst/Madera, Madera....................                 56                     30                     86
    Oakland, Alameda, Contra Costa and Marin...                 77                     34                    111
    Ontario/Victorville/Barstow, San Bernardino                 64                     38                    102
    Palm Springs, Riverside:                                                                                    
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 79                     38                    117
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 62                     38                    100
    Palo Alto/San Jose, Santa Clara............                105                     42                    147
    Redding, Shasta............................                 55                     34                     89
    Sacramento, Sacramento.....................                 72                     38                    110
    San Diego, San Diego.......................                 84                     38                    122
    San Francisco, San Francisco...............                114                     42                    156
    San Luis Obispo, San Luis Obispo...........                 71                     38                    109
    San Mateo/Redwood City, San Mateo..........                 85                     38                    123
    Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara...............                 98                     34                    132
    Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz:                                                                                     
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 95                     38                    133
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 81                     38                    119
    Santa Rosa, Sonoma.........................                 59                     38                     97
    South Lake Tahoe, El Dorado (See also                                                                       
     Stateline, NV)............................                126                     38                    164
    Stockton, San Joaquin......................                 51                     34                     85
    Tahoe City, Placer.........................                 57                     38                     95
    Visalia, Tulare............................                 64                     38                    102
    West Sacramento, Yolo......................                 60                     30                     90
    Yosemite Nat'l Park, Mariposa:                                                                              
        (April 1-October 31)...................                 99                     42                    141
        (November 1-March 31)..................                 84                     42                    126
Colorado:                                                                                                       
    Aspen, Pitkin:                                                                                              
        (January 15-March 31)..................                175                     42                    217
        (April 1-January 14)...................                 82                     42                    124
    Boulder, Boulder:                                                                                           
        (May 1-October 31).....................                 93                     38                    131
        (November 1-April 30)..................                 81                     38                    119
    Colorado Springs, El Paso                                                                                   
        (April 1-October 31)...................                 70                     30                    100
        (November 1-March 31)..................                 54                     30                     84

[[Page 92]]

                                                                                                                
    Cortez, Montezuma:                                                                                          
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 65                     30                     95
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 52                     30                     82
    Denver, Denver, Adams, Arapahoe and                                                                         
     Jefferson.................................                 92                     34                    126
    Durango, La Plata:                                                                                          
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 92                     34                    126
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 61                     34                     95
    Fort Collins/Loveland, Larimer:                                                                             
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 57                     30                     87
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 52                     30                     82
    Glenwood Springs, Garfield.................                 56                     34                     90
    Grand Junction, Mesa.......................                 57                     30                     87
    Gunnison, Gunnison:                                                                                         
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 62                     30                     92
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 50                     30                     80
    Keystone/Silverthorne, Summit:                                                                              
        (February 1-August 31).................                167                     42                    209
        (September 1-January 31)...............                128                     42                    170
    Montrose, Montrose:                                                                                         
        (June 1, September 30).................                 55                     30                     85
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 50                     30                     80
    Pagosa Springs, Archuleta..................                 53                     30                     83
    Pueblo, Pueblo:                                                                                             
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 60                     30                     90
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 51                     30                     81
    Steamboat Springs, Routt:                                                                                   
        (December 1-March 31)..................                114                     34                    148
        (April 1-November 30)..................                 74                     34                    108
    Telluride, San Miguel:                                                                                      
        (November 1-March 31)..................                145                     38                    183
        (April 1-October 31)...................                102                     38                    140
    Trinidad, Las Animas:                                                                                       
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 67                     30                     97
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 50                     30                     80
    Vail, Eagle:                                                                                                
        (November 1-March 31)..................                181                     42                    223
        (April 1-October 31)...................                189                     42                    131
Connecticut:                                                                                                    
    Bridgeport/Danbury, Fairfield..............                 86                     38                    124
    Hartford, Hartford and Middlesex...........                 75                     30                    105
    New Haven, New Haven.......................                 75                     30                    105
    New London/Groton, New London:                                                                              
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 86                     34                    120
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 67                     34                    101
    Putnam/Danielson, Windham..................                 53                     30                     83
    Salisbury/Lakeville, Litchfield............                 78                     34                    112

[[Page 93]]

                                                                                                                
    Vernon, Tolland............................                 55                     30                     85
Delaware:                                                                                                       
    Dover, Kent................................                 52                     34                     86
    Lewes, Sussex:                                                                                              
        (June 1-September 14)..................                 78                     38                    116
        (September 15-May 31)..................                 51                     38                     89
    Wilmington, New Castle.....................                 83                     38                    121
District of Columbia:                                                                                           
    Washington, DC (also the cities of                                                                          
     Alexandria, Falls Church, and Fairfax, and                                                                 
     the counties of Arlington, Loudoun, and                                                                    
     Fairfax in Virginia; and the counties of                                                                   
     Montgomery and Prince Georges in Maryland)                                                                 
     (See also Maryland and Virginia)..........                124                     42                    166
Florida:                                                                                                        
    Altamonte Springs, Seminole................                 74                     34                    108
    Bradenton, Manatee:                                                                                         
        (January 1-May 14).....................                 69                     30                     99
        (May 15-December 31)...................                 50                     30                     80
    Cocoa Beach, Brevard.......................                 75                     34                    109
    Daytona Beach, Volusia:                                                                                     
        (February 1-August 31).................                 73                     34                    107
        (September 1-January 31)...............                 54                     34                     88
    Fort Lauderdale, Broward:                                                                                   
        (December 15-April 30).................                 86                     34                    120
        (May 1-December 14)....................                 65                     34                     99
    Fort Myers, Lee:                                                                                            
        (January 1-April 30)...................                 95                     34                    129
        (May 1-December 31)....................                 66                     34                    100
    Fort Pierce, Saint Lucie:                                                                                   
        (December 1-April 30)..................                 60                     30                     90
        (May 1-November 30)....................                 50                     30                     80
    Fort Walton Beach, Okaloosa:                                                                                
        (April 1-September 14).................                 73                     30                    103
        (September 15-March 31)................                 58                     30                     88
    Gainesville, Alachua.......................                 59                     34                     93
    Gulf Breeze, Santa Rosa....................                 65                     34                     99
    Jacksonville, Duval County; Naval Station                                                                   
     Mayport...................................                 65                     30                     95
    Key West, Monroe:                                                                                           
        (December 15-April 30).................                172                     42                    214
        (May 1-December 14)....................                122                     42                    164
    Kissimmee, Osceola.........................                 67                     30                     97
    Lakeland, Polk:                                                                                             
        (January 1-April 30)...................                 63                     30                     93
        (May 1-December 31)....................                 55                     30                     85
    Miami, Dade................................                 79                     42                    121
    Naples, Collier:                                                                                            
        (December 15-April 30).................                 94                     38                    132
        (May 1-December 14)....................                 61                     38                     99
    Orlando, Orange............................                 69                     34                    103
    Panama City, Bay:                                                                                           
        (March 1-September 14).................                 55                     30                     85
        (September 15-February 29).............                 50                     30                     80

[[Page 94]]

                                                                                                                
    Pensacola, Escambia........................                 62                     34                     96
    Punta Gorda, Charlotte:                                                                                     
        (December 15-April 14).................                 75                     34                    109
        (April 15-December 14).................                 52                     34                     86
    Saint Augustine, Saint Johns:                                                                               
        (February 1-August 31).................                 60                     34                     94
        (September 1-January 31)...............                 50                     34                     84
    Sarasota, Sarasota:                                                                                         
        (December 15-April 30).................                 90                     34                    124
        (May 1-December 14)....................                 63                     34                     97
    Stuart, Martin:                                                                                             
        (January 1-April 30)...................                 67                     34                    101
        (May 1-December 31)....................                 61                     34                     95
    Tallahassee, Leon..........................                 68                     34                    102
    Tampa/St. Petersburg, Hillsborough and                                                                      
     Pinellas:                                                                                                  
        (January 1-April 30)...................                 81                     38                    119
        (May 1-December 31)....................                 72                     38                    110
    Vero Beach, Indian River:                                                                                   
        (January 15-April 30)..................                 86                     30                    116
        (May 1-January 14).....................                 73                     30                    103
    West Palm Beach, Palm Beach:                                                                                
        (January 1-April 30)...................                 85                     38                    123
        (May 1-December 31)....................                 64                     38                    102
Georgia:                                                                                                        
    Albany, Dougherty..........................                 59                     30                     89
    Athens, Clarke.............................                 58                     34                     92
    Atlanta, Clayton, De Kalb, Fulton, Cobb and                                                                 
     Gwinett...................................                 96                     38                    134
    Augusta, Richmond..........................                 53                     30                     83
    Columbus, Muscogee.........................                 56                     30                     86
    Conyers, Rockdale..........................                 54                     30                     84
    Macon, Bibb................................                 54                     30                     84
    Savannah, Chatham..........................                 63                     34                     97
Idaho:                                                                                                          
    Boise, Ada.................................                 61                     34                     95
    Coeur d'Alene, Kootenai:                                                                                    
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 67                     34                    101
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 55                     34                     89
    Idaho Falls, Bonneville....................                 52                     34                     86
    Ketchum/Sun Valley, Blaine                                                                                  
        (November 1-March 31)..................                 86                     38                    124
        (April 1-October 31)...................                 73                     38                    111
    McCall, Valley.............................                 66                     34                    100
    Sandpoint, Bonner:                                                                                          
        (July 1-August 31).....................                 79                     30                    109
        (September 1-June 30)..................                 50                     30                     80
    Stanley, Custer............................                 51                     34                     85

[[Page 95]]

                                                                                                                
Illinois:                                                                                                       
    Bloomington, McLean........................                 52                     30                     82
    Champaign/Urbana, Champaign................                 56                     34                     90
    Chicago, Du Page, Cook and Lake............                119                     42                    161
    Decatur, Macon.............................                 51                     30                     81
    Joliet, Will...............................                 53                     30                     83
    Kankakee, Kankakee.........................                 52                     30                     82
    Peoria, Peoria.............................                 58                     34                     92
    Rock Island, Rock Island...................                 76                     30                    106
    Rockford, Winnebago........................                 63                     38                    101
    Springfield, Sangamon......................                 53                     30                     83
Indiana:                                                                                                        
    Anderson, Madison..........................                 54                     30                     84
    Bloomington/Crane, Monroe and Martin.......                 51                     34                     85
    Burlington Beach/Valparaiso, Porter........                 73                     30                    103
    Carmel, Hamilton...........................                 63                     38                    101
    Elkhart, Elkhart...........................                 52                     30                     82
    Evansville, Vanderburgh....................                 63                     34                     97
    Fort Wayne, Allen..........................                 62                     30                     92
    French Lick, Orange........................                 57                     30                     87
    Gary/Merrillville, Lake....................                 57                     30                     87
    Greenwood, Johnson.........................                 55                     30                     85
    Indianapolis, Marion County; Fort Benjamin                                                                  
     Harrison..................................                 71                     38                    109
    Lafayette, Tippecanoe......................                 57                     34                     91
    Madison, Jefferson.........................                 52                     30                     82
    Michigan City, La Porte....................                 52                     30                     82
    Muncie, Delaware...........................                 53                     30                     83
    Nashville, Brown:                                                                                           
        (June 1-October 31)....................                112                     30                    142
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 90                     30                    120
    South Bend, St. Joseph.....................                 61                     30                     91
Iowa:                                                                                                           
    Bettendorf/Davenport, Scott................                 61                     30                     91
    Cedar Rapids, Linn.........................                 53                     34                     87
    Des Moines, Polk...........................                 60                     30                     90
    Iowa City, Johnson.........................                 54                     30                     84
Kansas:                                                                                                         
    Kansas City, Johnson and Wyandotte (See                                                                     
     also Kansas City, MO).....................                 78                     42                    120
    Manhattan, Riley...........................                 55                     30                     85
    Wichita, Sedgwick..........................                 63                     34                     97
Kentucky:                                                                                                       
    Covington, Kenton..........................                 58                     34                     92
    Florence, Boone............................                 61                     30                     91
    Lexington, Fayette.........................                 57                     34                     91
    Lousiville, Jefferson......................                 67                     38                    105
Louisiana:                                                                                                      
    Baton Rouge, East Baton Rouge Parish.......                 63                     34                     97
    Bossier City, Bossier Parish...............                 60                     30                     90
    Gonzales, Ascension Parish.................                 57                     30                     87
    Lafayette, Lafayette Parish................                 51                     30                     81

[[Page 96]]

                                                                                                                
    Lake Charles, Calcasieu Parish.............                 64                     30                     94
    New Orleans, Parishes of Jefferson,                                                                         
     Orleans, Plaquemines and St. Bernard......                 70                     42                    112
    Opelouses, Saint Landry....................                 58                     30                     88
    Shreveport, Caddo Parish...................                 58                     34                     92
    Slidell, St. Tammany Parish................                 51                     30                     81
    St. Francisville, West Feliciana...........                 85                     30                    115
Maine:                                                                                                          
    Augusta, Kennebec..........................                 51                     30                     81
    Bangor, Penobscot:                                                                                          
        (July 1-October 31)....................                 57                     30                     87
        (November 1-June 30)...................                 50                     30                     80
    Bar Harbor, Hancock:                                                                                        
        (July 1-September 14)..................                121                     34                    155
        (September 15-June 30).................                 84                     34                    118
    Bath, Sagadahoc:                                                                                            
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 61                     30                     91
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 53                     30                     83
    Calais, Washington.........................                 57                     30                     87
    Kennebunk/Sanford, York:                                                                                    
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 87                     34                    121
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 63                     34                     97
    Kittery, Portsmouth Naval Shipyard (See                                                                     
     also Portsmouth, NH):                                                                                      
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 75                     34                    109
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 56                     34                     90
    Portland, Cumberland:                                                                                       
        (July 1-October 31)....................                 86                     38                    124
        (November 1-June 30)...................                 65                     38                    103
    Rockport, Knox:                                                                                             
        (June 15-October 31)...................                 94                     34                    128
        (November 1-June 14)...................                 65                     34                     99
    Wiscasset, Lincoln:                                                                                         
        (July 1-Sepember 14)...................                 84                     30                    114
        (September 15-June 30).................                 57                     30                     87
Maryland:                                                                                                       
    (For the counties of Montgomery and Prince                                                                  
     Georges, see District of Columbia)                                                                         
    Annapolis, Anne Arundel....................                 86                     38                    124
    Baltimore, Baltimore and Harford...........                 96                     38                    134
    Columbia, Howard...........................                 87                     42                    129
    Frederick, Frederick.......................                 58                     38                     96
    Grasonville, Queen Annes...................                 55                     34                     89
    Hagerstown, Washington.....................                 55                     30                     85
    Lexington Park/St. Inigoes/Leonardtown,                                                                     
     Saint Mary's..............................                 59                     34                     93
    Lusby, Calvert.............................                 59                     34                     93
    Ocean City, Worcester:                                                                                      
        (May 1-September 30)...................                152                     42                    194
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 77                     42                    119

[[Page 97]]

                                                                                                                
    Saint Michaels, Talbot.....................                133                     38                    171
    Salisbury, Wicomico:                                                                                        
        (June 1-September 14)..................                 57                     34                     91
        (September 15-May 31)..................                 52                     34                     86
Massachusetts:                                                                                                  
    Andover, Essex.............................                 77                     38                    115
    Boston, Suffolk............................                116                     42                    158
    Cambridge/Lowell, Middlesex................                116                     34                    150
    Hyannis, Barnstable:                                                                                        
        (July 1-September 30)..................                112                     38                    150
        (October 1-June 30)....................                 67                     38                    105
    Martha's Vineyard/Nantucket, Dukes and                                                                      
     Nantucket:                                                                                                 
        (June 1-October 31)....................                179                     42                    221
        (November 1-May 31)....................                122                     42                    164
    Northampton, Hampshire.....................                 66                     30                     96
    Pittsfield, Berkshire......................                 56                     34                     90
    Plymouth, Plymouth:                                                                                         
        (June 15-October 31)...................                 87                     30                    117
        (November 1-June 14)...................                 64                     30                     94
    Quincy, Norfolk............................                 78                     34                    112
    South Deerfield/Greenfield, Franklin.......                 69                     30                     99
    Springfield, Hampden.......................                 67                     30                     97
    Taunton/New Bedford, Bristol...............                 58                     30                     88
    Worcester, Worcester.......................                 61                     30                     91
Michigan:                                                                                                       
    Ann Arobr, Washtenaw.......................                 67                     30                     97
    Battle Creek, Calhoun......................                 57                     30                     87
    Cadillac, Wexford..........................                 53                     30                     83
    Charlevoix, Charlevoix:                                                                                     
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 94                     30                    124
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 50                     30                     80
    Detroit, Wayne.............................                 84                     38                    122
    Flint, Genesee.............................                 52                     30                     82
    Frankfort, Benzie:                                                                                          
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 64                     30                     94
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 50                     30                     80
    Gaylord, Otsego:                                                                                            
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 58                     34                     92
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 52                     34                     86
    Grand Rapids, Kent.........................                 60                     34                     94
    Grayling, Crawford.........................                 52                     30                     82
    Holland, Ottawa:                                                                                            
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 59                     30                     89
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 51                     30                     81
    Kalamazzo, Kalamazoo.......................                 61                     30                     91
    Lansing/East Lansing, Ingham...............                 57                     30                     87
    Leland, Leelanau:                                                                                           
        (May 1-September 30)...................                114                     30                    144
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 80                     30                    110
    Ludington, Mason:                                                                                           
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 68                     30                     98

[[Page 98]]

                                                                                                                
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 50                     30                     80
    Mackinac Island, Mackinac:                                                                                  
        (June 1-September 30)..................                124                     38                    162
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 91                     38                    129
    Manistee, Manistee:                                                                                         
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 58                     30                     88
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 50                     30                     80
    Midland, Midland...........................                 65                     30                     95
    Mount Pleasant, Isabella...................                 56                     30                     86
    Muskegon, Muskegon.........................                 51                     30                     81
    Ontonagon, Ontonagon.......................                 55                     30                     85
    Petosky, Emmet.............................                 51                     34                     85
    Pontiac/Troy, Oakland......................                 81                     38                    119
    Port Huron, St. Clair......................                 52                     38                     90
    Sault Ste Marie, Chippewa..................                 77                     34                    111
    South Haven, Van Buren:                                                                                     
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 70                     30                    100
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 55                     30                     85
    St. Joseph/Benton Harbor/Niles, Berrien....                 56                     34                     90
    Traverse City, Grand Traverse:                                                                              
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 98                     34                    132
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 54                     34                     88
    Warren, Macomb.............................                 56                     30                     86
Minnesota:                                                                                                      
    Duluth, St. Louis:                                                                                          
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 59                     38                     97
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 51                     38                     89
    Hinckley, Pine.............................                 51                     30                     81
    Minneapolis/St. Paul, Anoka, Hennepin,                                                                      
     Dakota and Ramsey Counties; Fort Snelling                                                                  
     Military Reservation and Navy Astronautics                                                                 
     Group (Detachment BRAVO), Rosemount.......                 81                     38                    119
    Rochester, Olmstead........................                 61                     30                     91
Mississippi:                                                                                                    
    Biloxi/Gulfport/Pascagoula/Bay St. Louis,                                                                   
     Harrison, Jackson, and Hancock:                                                                            
        (May 1-September 14)...................                 72                     34                    106
        (September 15-April 30)................                 63                     34                     97
    Greenville, Washington.....................                 51                     30                     81
    Jackson, Hinds.............................                 60                     34                     94
    Philadelphia, Neshoba......................                 60                     30                     90
    Ridgeland, Madison.........................                 55                     34                     89
    Robinsonville, Tunica......................                 64                     30                     94
    Vicksburg, Warren..........................                 51                     30                     81
Missouri                                                                                                        
    Branson, Taney:                                                                                             
        (May 1-October 31).....................                 78                     30                    108
        (November 1-April 30)..................                 62                     30                     92
    Cape Girardeau, Cape Girardeau.............                 54                     30                     84

[[Page 99]]

                                                                                                                
    Hannibal, Marion:                                                                                           
        (June 1-September 14)..................                 55                     30                     85
        (September 15-May 31)..................                 50                     30                     80
    Jefferson City, Cole.......................                 56                     30                     86
    Kansas City, Clay, Jackson and Platte (See                                                                  
     also Kansas City, KS).....................                 78                     42                    120
    Lake Ozark, Miller.........................                 53                     34                     87
    Osage Beach, Camden:                                                                                        
        (May 15-October 31)....................                 68                     34                    102
        (November 1-May 14)....................                 57                     34                     91
    Springfield, Greene........................                 54                     34                     88
    St. Louis, St. Charles and St. Louis.......                 74                     42                    116
Montana:                                                                                                        
    Great Falls, Cascade.......................                 54                     30                     84
    Kalispell/Polson, Flathead and Lake........                 54                     30                     84
Nebraska:                                                                                                       
    Kearney, Buffalo...........................                 51                     30                     81
    Lincoln, Lancaster.........................                 53                     30                     83
    Omaha, Douglas.............................                 63                     34                     97
Nevada:                                                                                                         
    Elko, Elko.................................                 53                     30                     83
    Incline Village*:                                                                                           
        (June 1-September 30)..................                149                     38                    187
        (October 1-May 31).....................                106                     38                    144
    Las Vegas, Clark County; Nellis AFB........                 74                     38                    112
    Reno, all points in Washoe County other                                                                     
     than the city of Incline Village..........                 56                     34                     90
    Stateline, Douglas (See also South Lake                                                                     
     Tahoe, CA)................................                126                     38                    164
    Winnemucca, Humboldt.......................                 55                     30                     85
New Hampshire                                                                                                   
    Concord, Merrimack:                                                                                         
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 70                     30                    100
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 61                     30                     91
    Conway, Carroll:                                                                                            
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 74                     34                    108
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 60                     34                     94
    Durham, Strafford:                                                                                          
        (May 1-October 31).....................                 66                     30                     96
        (November 1-April 30)..................                 58                     30                     88
    Hanover, Grafton and Sullivan:                                                                              
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 72                     38                    110
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 58                     38                     96
    Laconia, Belknap:                                                                                           
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 83                     30                    113
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 58                     30                     88
    Manchester, Hillsborough...................                 68                     30                     98
    Portsmouth/Newington, Rockingham County;                                                                    
     Pease AFB (See also Kittery, ME):                                                                          
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 75                     34                    109
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 56                     34                     90
New Jersey:                                                                                                     
    Atlantic City, Atlantic:                                                                                    
        (April 1-November 30)..................                114                     38                    152

[[Page 100]]

                                                                                                                
        (December 1-March 31)..................                 76                     38                    114
    Belle Mead, Somerset.......................                 69                     34                    103
    Camden/Moorestown, Camden and Burlington...                 77                     38                    115
    Edison, Middlesex..........................                 66                     38                    104
    Flemington, Hunterdon......................                 63                     34                     97
    Freehold/Eatontown, Monmouth County; Fort                                                                   
     Monmouth..................................                 83                     34                    117
    Millville, Cumberland......................                 54                     34                     88
    Newark, Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Passaic and                                                                  
     Union.....................................                 93                     42                    135
    Ocean City/Cape May, Cape May:                                                                              
        (May 15-September 30)..................                156                     30                    186
        (October 1-May 14).....................                104                     30                    134
    Parsippany/Dover, Morris County; Picatinny                                                                  
     Arsenal...................................                 97                     38                    135
    Princeton/Trenton, Mercer..................                 89                     38                    127
    Salem, Salem...............................                 51                     30                     81
    Tom's River, Ocean:                                                                                         
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 69                     34                    103
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 62                     34                     96
New Mexico:                                                                                                     
    Albuquerque, Bernalillo....................                 70                     34                    104
    Cloudcroft, Otero..........................                 87                     30                    117
    Farmington, San Juan.......................                 57                     34                     91
    Gallup, McKinley...........................                 51                     30                     81
    Las Cruces/White Sands, Dona Ana...........                 53                     30                     83
    Los Alamos, Los Alamos.....................                 75                     34                    109
    Raton, Colfax:                                                                                              
        (June 1-August 31).....................                 55                     30                     85
        (September 1-May 31)...................                 50                     30                     80
    Santa Fe, Santa Fe:                                                                                         
        (May 1-October 31).....................                121                     42                    163
        (November 1-April 30)..................                 91                     42                    133
    Taos, Taos:                                                                                                 
        (December 1-March 31)..................                 87                     34                    121
        (April 1-November 30)..................                 76                     34                    110
New York:                                                                                                       
    Albany, Albany.............................                 81                     38                    119
    Auburn, Cayuga.............................                 51                     30                     81
    Batavia, Genesee...........................                 60                     34                     94
    Binghamton, Broome.........................                 62                     34                     96
    Buffalo, Erie..............................                 80                     38                    118
    Catskill, Greene:                                                                                           
        (June 1-September 14)..................                 66                     30                     96
        (September 15-May 31)..................                 53                     30                     83
    Corning, Steuben...........................                 61                     34                     95
    Glens Falls, Warren:                                                                                        
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 84                     38                    122
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 59                     38                     97

[[Page 101]]

                                                                                                                
    Ithaca, Tompkins...........................                 62                     30                     92
    Kingston, Ulster...........................                 51                     34                     85
    Lake Placid, Essex:                                                                                         
        (June 1-November 14)...................                 88                     34                    122
        (November 15-May 31)...................                 59                     34                     93
    Monticello, Sullivan.......................                 62                     34                     96
    New York City, the boroughs of the Bronx,                                                                   
     Brooklyn, Manhattan, Queens and Staten                                                                     
     Island; Nassau and Suffolk Counties.......                153                     42                    195
    Niagara Falls, Niagara:                                                                                     
        (May 15-October 31)....................                 77                     34                    111
        (November 1-May 14)....................                 63                     34                     97
    Oswego, Oswego.............................                 61                     30                     91
    Owego, Tioga...............................                 57                     30                     87
    Palisades/Nyack, Rockland..................                 60                     34                     94
    Plattsburgh, Clinton.......................                 54                     34                     88
    Poughkeepsie, Dutchess.....................                 74                     30                    104
    Rochester, Monroe..........................                 74                     42                    116
    Romulus/Waterloo, Seneca...................                 65                     30                     95
    Saratoga Springs, Saratoga:                                                                                 
        (May 1-October 31).....................                 94                     38                    132
        (November 1-April 30)..................                 53                     38                     91
    Schenectady, Schenectady...................                 61                     34                     95
    Syracuse, Onondaga.........................                 68                     34                    102
    Utica, Oneida..............................                 60                     34                     94
    Watertown, Jefferson.......................                 59                     30                     89
    Watkins Glen, Schuyler:                                                                                     
        (May 1-October 31).....................                 88                     30                    118
        (November 1-April 30)..................                 58                     30                     88
    West Point, Orange.........................                 53                     30                     83
    White Plains, Westchester..................                105                     42                    147
North Carolina:                                                                                                 
    Asheville, Buncombe:                                                                                        
        (May 1-October 31).....................                 79                     34                    113
        (November 1-April 30)..................                 50                     34                     84
    Charlotte, Mecklenburg.....................                 61                     38                     99
    Duck/Outer Banks, Dare:                                                                                     
        (May 1-September 30)...................                134                     34                    168
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 50                     34                     84
    Fayetteville, Cumberland...................                 52                     30                     82
    Greensboro/High Point, Guilford............                 60                     34                     94
    Morehead City, Carteret....................                 60                     30                     90
    New Bern/Havelock, Craven..................                 53                     30                     83
    Research Park/Raleigh/Durham/Chapel Hill,                                                                   
     Wake, Durham and Orange...................                 86                     38                    124
    Wilmington, New Hanover:                                                                                    
        (March 1-September 30).................                 66                     30                     96
        (October 1-February 29)................                 58                     30                     88
    Winston-Salem, Forsyth.....................                 64                     34                     98
North Dakota: (See footnote 5)                                                                                  
Ohio:                                                                                                           
    Akron, Summit..............................                 73                     34                    107

[[Page 102]]

                                                                                                                
    Bellevue/Norwalk, Huron:                                                                                    
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 90                     30                    120
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 55                     30                     85
    Cambridge, Guernsey........................                 55                     30                     85
    Canton, Stark..............................                 55                     30                     85
    Cincinnati/Evendale, Hamilton and Warren...                 66                     34                    100
    Cleveland, Cuyahoga........................                 86                     38                    124
    Columbus, Franklin.........................                 70                     34                    104
    Dayton/Fairborn, Montgomery and Greene;                                                                     
     Wright Patterson AFB......................                 67                     30                     97
    Elyria, Lorain:                                                                                             
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 67                     30                     97
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 52                     30                     82
    Fairfield/Hamilton, Butler.................                 59                     30                     89
    Findlay, Hancock...........................                 55                     30                     85
    Geneva, Ashtabula..........................                 76                     30                    106
    Jackson, Jackson and Pike..................                 53                     30                     83
    Lancaster, Fairfield.......................                 58                     30                     88
    Perrysburg, Wood...........................                 72                     30                    102
    Port Clinton/Oakharbor, Ottawa:                                                                             
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 81                     30                    111
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 56                     30                     86
    Portsmouth, Scioto.........................                 52                     30                     82
    Sandusky, Erie:                                                                                             
        (May 1-September 30)...................                109                     30                    139
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 55                     30                     85
    Springfield, Clark.........................                 53                     34                     87
    Tinney/Fremont, Sandusky:                                                                                   
        (June 1-September 14)..................                 60                     30                     90
        (September 15-May 31)..................                 50                     30                     80
    Toledo, Lucas..............................                 56                     34                     90
Oklahoma:                                                                                                       
    Eufaula, McIntosh..........................                 56                     30                     86
    Norman, Cleveland..........................                 53                     30                     83
    Oklahoma City, Oklahoma....................                 66                     30                     96
    Tulsa/Bartlesville, Osage, Tulsa and                                                                        
     Washington................................                 55                     30                     85
Oregon:                                                                                                         
    Ashland/Medford, Jackson...................                 78                     38                    116
    Beaverton, Washington......................                 70                     38                    108
    Bend, Deschutes............................                 63                     30                     93
    Clackamas/Milwaukie, Clackamas.............                 78                     30                    108
    Coos Bay, Coos.............................                 53                     30                     83
    Crater Lake/Klamath Falls, Klamath.........                 99                     38                    137
    Eugene/Florence, Lane......................                 67                     34                    101
    Gold Beach, Curry:                                                                                          
        (May 15-October 31)....................                 64                     30                     94
        (November 1-May 14)....................                 50                     30                     80

[[Page 103]]

                                                                                                                
    Lincoln City/Newport, Lincoln:                                                                              
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 94                     38                    132
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 72                     38                    110
    Portland, Multnomah........................                 87                     38                    125
    Salem, Marion..............................                 57                     30                     87
    Seaside, Clatsop:                                                                                           
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 72                     30                    102
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 65                     30                     95
Pennsylvania:                                                                                                   
    Allentown, Lehigh..........................                 61                     34                     95
    Chester/Radnor, Delaware...................                103                     42                    145
    Easton, Northampton........................                 53                     30                     83
    Erie, Erie,................................                 61                     30                     91
    Gettysburg, Adams..........................  .................      .................      .................
     (May 1-October 31)                                         68                     34                    102
     (November 1-April 30)                                      62                     34                     96
    Harrisburg, Dauphin........................                 74                     34                    108
    King of Prussia/Ft. Washington, Montgomery                                                                  
     County, except Bala Cynwyd (See also                                                                       
     Philadelphia, PA).........................                 80                     38                    118
    Lancaster, Lancaster.......................                 71                     34                    105
    Lebanon, Lebanon County; Indian Town Gap                                                                    
     Military Reservation......................                 54                     30                     84
    Mechanicsburg, Cumberland..................                 61                     30                     91
    Mercer, Mercer.............................                 53                     30                     83
    Philadelphia,  Philadelphia  County;  city                                                                  
     of  Bala  Cynwd in Montgomery County......                100                     38                    138
    Pittsburgh, Allegheny......................                 83                     38                    121
    Reading, Berks.............................                 64                     30                     94
    Scranton, Lackawanna.......................                 57                     34                     91
    Shippingport/Beaver Falls, Beaver..........                 51                     30                     81
    State College, Centre......................                 67                     34                    101
    Uniontown, Fayette.........................                 56                     30                     86
    Valley Forge/Malvern, Chester..............                 90                     38                    128
    Warminster, Bucks County; Naval Air                                                                         
     Development Center........................                 60                     34                     94
    York, York.................................                 56                     34                     90
Rhode Island:                                                                                                   
    East Greenwich, Kent County; Naval                                                                          
     Construction Battalion Center, Davisville.                 84                     34                    118
    Newport/Block Island, Newport and                                                                           
     Washington:                                                                                                
        (May 1-October 14).....................                 99                     42                    141
        (October 15-April 30)..................                 81                     42                    123
    Providence, Providence.....................                 87                     42                    129
South Carolina:                                                                                                 
    Aiken, Aiken...............................                 53                     30                     83
    Charleston, Charleston and Berkeley........                 62                     34                     96
    Columbia, Richland.........................                 58                     30                     88
    Greenville, Greenville.....................                 75                     38                    113
    Hilton Head, Beaufort:                                                                                      
        (March 1-September 30).................                 83                     34                    117
        (October 1-February 29)................                 61                     34                     95
    Myrtle Beach, Horry County; Myrtle Beach                                                                    
     AFB:                                                                                                       
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 96                     34                    130
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 58                     34                     92
    Spartanburg, Spartanburg...................                 53                     30                     83

[[Page 104]]

                                                                                                                
South Dakota:                                                                                                   
    Custer, Custer:                                                                                             
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 73                     30                    103
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 52                     30                     82
    Hot Springs, Fall River:                                                                                    
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 75                     30                    105
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 50                     30                     80
    Rapid City, Pennington:                                                                                     
        (June 1-August 31).....................                 85                     30                    115
        (September 1-May 31)...................                 51                     30                     81
    Sioux Falls, Minnehaha.....................                 51                     30                     81
    Spearfish, Lawrence:                                                                                        
        (May 1-September 14)...................                 65                     30                     95
        (September 15-April 30)................                 51                     30                     81
Tennessee:                                                                                                      
    Chattanooga, Hamilton......................                 61                     30                     91
    Gatlinburg, Sevier.........................                 74                     34                    108
    Johnson City, Washington...................                 53                     30                     83
    Knoxville, Knox County; city of Oak Ridge..                 63                     34                     97
    Memphis, Shelby............................                 69                     30                     99
    Murfreesboro, Rutherford...................                 55                     30                     85
    Nashville, Davidson........................                 82                     38                    120
    Townsend, Blount...........................                 70                     30                    100
Texas:                                                                                                          
    Abilene, Taylor............................                 59                     30                     89
    Amarillo, Potter...........................                 54                     30                     84
    Austin, Travis.............................                 74                     34                    108
    Brownsville, Cameron.......................                 54                     30                     84
    College Station/Bryan, Brazos..............                 52                     30                     82
    Corpus Christi/Ingelside, Nueces and San                                                                    
     Patricio..................................                 64                     30                     94
    Dallas/Fort Worth, Dallas and Tarrant......                 84                     42                    126
    Eagle Pass, Maverick.......................                 54                     30                     84
    El Paso, El Paso...........................                 68                     34                    102
    Fort Davis, Jeff Davis.....................                 64                     30                     94
    Galveston, Galveston:                                                                                       
        (May 1-September 14)...................                 77                     42                    119
        (September 15-April 30)................                 67                     42                    109
    Granbury, Hood.............................                 52                     30                     82
    Houston, Harris County; L.B. Johnson Space                                                                  
     Center and Ellington AFB..................                 78                     38                    116
    Lajitas, Brewster..........................                 58                     30                     88
    Laredo, Webb...............................                 60                     30                     90
    Lubbock, Lubbock...........................                 60                     34                     94
    McAllen, Hidalgo...........................                 62                     30                     92
    Midland/Odessa, Ector and Midland..........                 55                     30                     85
    Plano, Collin..............................                 84                     34                    118
    San Antonio, Bexar.........................                 94                     34                    128

[[Page 105]]

                                                                                                                
    Temple, Bell...............................                 52                     30                     82
    Tyler, Smith...............................                 52                     30                     82
    Victoria, Victoria.........................                 53                     30                     83
    Waco, McLennan.............................                 57                     30                     87
Utah:                                                                                                           
    Bullfrog, Garfield:                                                                                         
        (April 1-October 31)...................                115                     34                    149
        (November 1-March 31)..................                 80                     34                    114
    Cedar City, Iron:                                                                                           
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 64                     30                     94
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 50                     30                     80
    Moab, Grand................................                 88                     30                    118
    Park City, Summit:                                                                                          
        (December 1-March 31)..................                147                     42                    189
        (April 1-November 30)..................                 84                     42                    126
    Provo, Utah................................                 63                     34                     97
    Salt Lake City/Ogden, Salt Lake, Weber, and                                                                 
     Davis Counties; Dugway Proving Ground and                                                                  
     Tooele Army Depot.........................                 75                     38                    113
    St. George, Washington.....................                 52                     34                     86
    Vernal, Uintah:                                                                                             
        (May 1-September 14)...................                 55                     30                     85
        (September 15-April 30)................                 50                     30                     80
Vermont:                                                                                                        
    Brattleboro, Windham.......................                 53                     30                     83
    Burlington, Chittenden.....................                 64                     34                     98
    Manchester, Bennington.....................                102                     34                    136
    Middlebury, Addison:                                                                                        
        (May 1-October 31).....................                 79                     34                    113
        (November 1-April 30)..................                 62                     34                     96
    Montpelier, Washington.....................                 55                     30                     85
    Rutland, Rutland:                                                                                           
        (December 15-March 31).................                 58                     30                     88
        (April 1-December 14)..................                 53                     30                     83
    St. Albans, Franklin.......................                 53                     30                     83
    White River Junction, Windsor:                                                                              
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 72                     30                    102
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 58                     30                     88
Virginia:                                                                                                       
    (For the cities of Alexandria, Fairfax, and                                                                 
     Falls Church, and the counties of                                                                          
     Arlington, Fairfax, and Loudoun, see                                                                       
     District of Columbia)                                                                                      
    Blacksburg, Montgomery.....................                 51                     30                     81
    Charlottseville*...........................                 56                     42                     98
    Harrisonburg, Harrisonburg.................                 51                     30                     81
    Lexington*.................................                 53                     30                     83
    Lynchburg*.................................                 62                     34                     96
    Manassas/Manassas Park*, Prince William....                 53                     30                     83
    Richmond*, Chesterfield and Henrico                                                                         
     Counties; also Defense Supply Center......                 70                     38                    108
    Roanoke*...................................                 54                     34                     88
    Virginia Beach*, Virginia Beach (also                                                                       
     Norfolk, Portsmouth and Chesapeake):*                                                                      
        (May 1-September 30)...................                108                     38                    146
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 77                     38                    115

[[Page 106]]

                                                                                                                
    Wallops Island, Accomack:                                                                                   
        (June 1-October 14)....................                 91                     30                    121
        (October 15-May 31)....................                 70                     30                    100
    Williamsburg*, Wililamsburg (also Hampton,                                                                  
     Newport News, York County, Naval Weapons                                                                   
     Station, Yorktown)*:                                                                                       
        (April 1-October 31)...................                 91                     34                    125
        (November 1-March 31)..................                 65                     34                     99
    Wintergreen, Nelson........................                103                     42                    145
Washington:                                                                                                     
    Anacortes/Mt. Vernon/Whidbey Island, Skagit                                                                 
     and Island:                                                                                                
        (May 1-October 14).....................                 69                     34                    103
        (October 15-April 30)..................                 59                     34                     93
    Bellingham, Whatcom........................                 56                     34                     90
    Bremerton, Kitsap..........................                 57                     30                     87
    Friday Harbor, San Juan:...................                                                                 
        (June 1-October 31)....................                 84                     38                    122
        (November 1-May 31)....................                 71                     38                    109
    Kelso/Longview, Cowlitz....................                 53                     34                     87
    Lynnwood/Everett, Snohomish................                 65                     34                     99
    Ocean Shores, Grays Harbor:                                                                                 
        (April 1-September 30).................                 69                     34                    103
        (October 1-March 31)...................                 55                     34                     89
    Port Angeles, Clallam:                                                                                      
        (May 15-September 30)..................                 71                     34                    105
        (October 1-May 14).....................                 51                     34                     85
    Port Townsend, Jefferson:                                                                                   
        (April 15-October 31)..................                 81                     30                    111
        (November 1-April 14)..................                 64                     30                     94
    Seattle, King..............................                 98                     38                    136
    Spokane, Spokane                                            67                     38                    105
    Tacoma, Pierce.............................                 60                     30                     90
    Tumwater/Olympia, Thurston.................                 64                     30                     94
    Vancouver, Clark...........................                 68                     34                    102
West Virginia:                                                                                                  
    Berkeley Springs, Morgan...................                 82                     30                    112
    Charleston, Kanawha........................                 58                     30                     88
    Harpers Ferry, Jefferson...................                 66                     30                     96
    Martinsburg, Berkeley......................                 62                     30                     92
    Morgantown, Monongalia.....................                 65                     30                     95
    Parkersburg, Wood..........................                 52                     30                     82
    Wheeling, Ohio.............................                 53                     34                     87
Wisconsin:                                                                                                      
    Appleton, Outagamie........................                 61                     30                     91
    Brookfield, Waukesha.......................                 66                     38                    104
    Eagle River, Vilas:                                                                                         
        (June 1-September 30)..................                 59                     30                     89
        (October 1-May 31).....................                 50                     30                     80

[[Page 107]]

                                                                                                                
    Eau Claire, Eau Claire.....................                 55                     34                     89
    Green Bay, Brown...........................                 68                     30                     98
    La Crosse, La Crosse.......................                 55                     34                     89
    Lake Geneva, Walworth:                                                                                      
        (May 1-October 31).....................                 99                     34                    133
        (November 1-April 30)..................                 69                     34                    103
    Madison, Dane..............................                 62                     34                     96
    Milwaukee, Milwaukee.......................                 70                     34                    104
    Mishicot, Manitowoc........................                 52                     30                     82
    Oshkosh, Winnebago.........................                 55                     34                     89
    Racine/Kenosha, Racine and Kenosha.........                 58                     34                     92
    Rhinelander/Minocqua, Oneida...............                 52                     30                     82
    Sheboygan/Plymouth, Sheboygan..............                 51                     30                     81
    Sturgeon Bay, Door:                                                                                         
        (June 1-September 14)..................                 65                     30                     95
        (September 15-May 31)..................                 50                     30                     80
    Wautoma, Waushara..........................                 51                     30                     81
    Wisconsin Dells, Columbia:                                                                                  
        (June 1-September 14)..................                107                     38                    145
        (September 15-May 31)..................                 54                     38                     92
Wyoming:                                                                                                        
    Cody, Park:                                                                                                 
        (May 1-September 30)...................                 88                     30                    118
        (October 1-April 30)...................                 52                     30                     82
    Jackson, Teton:                                                                                             
        (June 1-October 14)....................                102                     42                    144
        (October 15-May 31)....................                 64                     42                    106
    Thermopolis, Hot Springs:                                                                                   
        (June 1-September 14)..................                 62                     30                     92
        (September 15-May 31)..................                 50                     30                    80 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Unless otherwise specified, the per diem locality is defined as ``all locations within, or entirely         
  surrounded by, the corporate limits of the key city, including independent entities located within those      
  boundaries.''                                                                                                 
\2\ Per diem localities with county definitions shall include ``all locations within, or entirely surrounded by,
  the corporate limits of the key city as well as the boundaries of the listed counties, including independent  
  entities located within the boundaries of the key city and the listed counties.''                             
\3\ When a military installation or Government-related facility (whether or not specifically named) is located  
  partially within more than one city or county boundary, the applicable per diem rate for the entire           
  installation or facility is the higher of the two rates which apply to the cities and/or counties, even though
  part(s) of such activities may be located outside the defined per diem locality.                              
\4\ Federal agencies may submit a request to GSA for review of the costs covered by per diem in a particular    
  city or area where the standard CONUS rate applies when travel to that location is repetitive or on a         
  continuing basis and travelers' experiences indicate that the prescribed rate is inadequate. Other per diem   
  localities listed in this appendix will be reviewed on an annual basis by GSA to determine whether rates are  
  adequate. Requests for per diem rate adjustments shall be submitted by the agency headquarters office to the  
  General Services Administration, Office of Governmentwide Policy, Attn: Travel and Transportation Management  
  Policy Division (MTT), Washington, DC 20405. Agencies should designate an individual responsible for          
  reviewing, coordinating, and submitting to GSA any requests from bureaus or subagencies. Requests for rate    
  adjustments shall include a city designation, a description of the surrounding location involved (county or   
  other defined area), and a recommended rate supported by a statement explaining the circumstances that cause  
  the existing rate to be inadequate. The request also must contain an estimate of the annual number of trips to
  the location, the average duration of such trips, and the primary purpose of travel to the locations. Agencies
  should submit their requests to GSA no later than May 1 in order for a city to be included in the annual      
  review.                                                                                                       
\5\ The standard CONUS rate of $80 ($50 for lodging and $30 for M&IE) applies to all per diem localities in the 
  State of North Dakota.                                                                                        



[[Page 108]]

[FTR Amdt. 52, 61 FR 59185, Nov. 21, 1996; 61 FR 65635, Dec. 13, 1996; 
as amended by FT2 Amdt. 52, 62 FR 6042, Feb. 10, 1997; Amdt. 56, 62 FR 
13342, Mar. 20, 1997; FTR Amdt. 67, 62 FR 33753, June 23, 1997]
Appendix B to Chapter 301--Allocation of M&IE Rates to Be Used in Making 
                   Deductions From the M&IE Allowance

    M&IE rates for localities in nonforeign areas (prescribed in 
Civilian Personnel Per Diem Bulletins published periodically in the 
Federal Register by the Secretary of Defense) and for localities in 
foreign areas (established by the Secretary of State in section 925, a 
per diem supplement to the Standardized Regulations (Government 
Civilians, Foreign Areas)) shall be allocated as shown in this table 
(Sec. 301-7.12(a)(2)(ii) of this chapter) when making deductions from 
nonforeign or foreign area per diem rates.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                             M&IE Rate                              Breakfast    Lunch      Dinner   Incidentals
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$1................................................................      $0         $0         $0          $1    
2.................................................................      0          0          1           1     
3.................................................................      0          1          1           1     
4.................................................................      1          1          1           1     
5.................................................................      1          1          2           1     
6.................................................................      1          2          2           1     
7.................................................................      1          2          3           1     
8.................................................................      1          2          3           2     
9.................................................................      1          2          4           2     
10................................................................      2          2          4           2     
11................................................................      2          3          4           2     
12................................................................      2          3          5           2     
13................................................................      2          3          5           3     
14................................................................      2          4          5           3     
15................................................................      2          4          6           3     
16................................................................      2          4          7           3     
17................................................................      3          4          7           3     
18................................................................      3          5          7           3     
19................................................................      3          5          8           3     
20................................................................      3          5          8           4     
21................................................................      3          5          9           4     
22................................................................      3          6          9           4     
23................................................................      3          6          9           5     
24................................................................      4          6          9           5     
25................................................................      4          6          10          5     
26................................................................      4          7          10          5     
27................................................................      4          7          11          5     
28................................................................      4          7          11          6     
29................................................................      4          7          12          6     
30................................................................      5          7          12          6     
31................................................................      5          8          12          6     
32................................................................      5          8          13          6     
33................................................................      5          8          13          7     
34................................................................      5          9          13          7     
35................................................................      5          9          14          7     
36................................................................      5          9          15          7     
37................................................................      6          9          15          7     
38................................................................      6          10         15          7     
39................................................................      6          10         16          7     
40................................................................      6          10         16          8     
41................................................................      6          10         17          8     
42................................................................      6          11         17          8     
43................................................................      6          11         17          9     
44................................................................      7          11         17          9     
45................................................................      7          11         18          9     
46................................................................      7          12         18          9     
47................................................................      7          12         19          9     
48................................................................      7          12         19          10    
49................................................................      7          12         20          10    
50................................................................      8          12         20          10    
51................................................................      8          13         20          10    
52................................................................      8          13         21          10    
53................................................................      8          13         21          11    
54................................................................      8          14         21          11    
55................................................................      8          14         22          11    
56................................................................      8          14         23          11    
57................................................................      9          14         23          11    
58................................................................      9          15         23          11    
59................................................................      9          15         24          11    
60................................................................      9          15         24          12    
61................................................................      9          15         25          12    
62................................................................      9          16         25          12    
63................................................................      9          16         25          13    
64................................................................      10         16         25          13    
65................................................................      10         16         26          13    
66................................................................      10         17         26          13    
67................................................................      10         17         27          13    
68................................................................      10         17         27          14    
69................................................................      10         17         28          14    
70................................................................      11         17         28          14    
71................................................................      11         18         28          14    
72................................................................      11         18         29          14    
73................................................................      11         18         29          15    
74................................................................      11         19         29          15    
75................................................................      11         19         30          15    
76................................................................      11         19         31          15    
77................................................................      12         19         31          15    
78................................................................      12         20         31          15    
79................................................................      12         20         32          15    
80................................................................      12         20         32          16    
81................................................................      12         20         33          16    
82................................................................      12         21         33          16    
83................................................................      12         21         33          17    
84................................................................      13         21         33          17    
85................................................................      13         21         34          17    
86................................................................      13         22         34          17    
87................................................................      13         22         35          17    
88................................................................      13         22         35          18    
89................................................................      13         22         36          18    
90................................................................      14         22         36          18    
91................................................................      14         23         36          18    
92................................................................      14         23         37          18    
93................................................................      14         23         37          19    
94................................................................      14         24         37          19    
95................................................................      14         24         38          19    
96................................................................      14         24         39          19    
97................................................................      15         24         39          19    
98................................................................      15         25         39          19    
99................................................................      15         25         40          19    
100...............................................................      15         25         40          20    
101...............................................................      15         25         41          20    
102...............................................................      15         26         41          20    
103...............................................................      15         26         41          21    
104...............................................................      16         26         41          21    
105...............................................................      16         26         42          21    
106...............................................................      16         27         42          21    
107...............................................................      16         27         43          21    
108...............................................................      16         27         43          22    
109...............................................................      16         27         44          22    
110...............................................................      17         27         44          22    
111...............................................................      17         28         44          22    
112...............................................................      17         28         45          22    
113...............................................................      17         28         45          23    
114...............................................................      17         29         45          23    
115...............................................................      17         29         46          23    

[[Page 109]]

                                                                                                                
116...............................................................      17         29         47          23    
117...............................................................      18         29         47          23    
118...............................................................      18         30         47          23    
119...............................................................      18         30         48          23    
120...............................................................      18         30         48          24    
121...............................................................      18         30         49          24    
122...............................................................      18         31         49          24    
123...............................................................      18         31         49          25    
124...............................................................      19         31         49          25    
125...............................................................      19         31         50          25    
126...............................................................      19         32         50          25    
127...............................................................      19         32         51          25    
128...............................................................      19         32         51          26    
129...............................................................      19         32         52          26    
130...............................................................      20         32         52          26    
131...............................................................      20         33         52          26    
132...............................................................      20         33         53          26    
133...............................................................      20         33         53          27    
134...............................................................      20         34         53          27    
135...............................................................      20         34         54          27    
136...............................................................      20         34         55          27    
137...............................................................      21         34         55          27    
138...............................................................      21         35         55          27    
139...............................................................      21         35         56          27    
140...............................................................      21         35         56          28    
141...............................................................      21         35         57          28    
142...............................................................      21         36         57          28    
143...............................................................      21         36         57          29    
144...............................................................      22         36         57          29    
145...............................................................      22         36         58          29    
146...............................................................      22         37         58          29    
147...............................................................      22         37         59          29    
148...............................................................      22         37         59          30    
149...............................................................      22         37         60          30    
150...............................................................      23         37         60          30    
151...............................................................      23         38         60          30    
152...............................................................      23         38         61          30    
153...............................................................      23         38         61          31    
154...............................................................      23         39         61          31    
155...............................................................      23         39         62          31    
156...............................................................      23         39         63          31    
157...............................................................      24         39         63          31    
158...............................................................      24         40         63          31    
159...............................................................      24         40         64          31    
160...............................................................      24         40         64          32    
161...............................................................      24         40         65          32    
162...............................................................      24         41         65          32    
163...............................................................      24         41         65          33    
164...............................................................      25         41         65          33    
165...............................................................      25         41         66          33    
166...............................................................      25         42         66          33    
167...............................................................      25         42         67          33    
168...............................................................      25         42         67          34    
169...............................................................      25         42         68          34    
170...............................................................      26         42         68          34    
171...............................................................      26         43         68          34    
172...............................................................      26         43         69          34    
173...............................................................      26         43         69          35    
174...............................................................      26         44         69          35    
175...............................................................      26         44         70          35    
176...............................................................      26         44         71          35    
177...............................................................      27         44         71          35    
178...............................................................      27         45         71          35    
179...............................................................      27         45         72          35    
180...............................................................      27         45         72          36    
181...............................................................      27         45         73          36    
182...............................................................      27         46         73          36    
183...............................................................      27         46         73          37    
184...............................................................      28         46         73          37    
185...............................................................      28         46         74          37    
186...............................................................      28         47         74          37    
187...............................................................      28         47         75          37    
188...............................................................      28         47         75          38    
189...............................................................      28         47         76          38    
190...............................................................      29         47         76          38    
191...............................................................      29         48         76          38    
192...............................................................      29         48         77          38    
193...............................................................      29         48         77          39    
194...............................................................      29         49         77          39    
195...............................................................      29         49         78          39    
196...............................................................      29         49         79          39    
197...............................................................      30         49         79          39    
198...............................................................      30         50         79          39    
199...............................................................      30         50         80          39    
200...............................................................      30         50         80          40    
201...............................................................      30         50         81          40    
202...............................................................      30         51         81          40    
203...............................................................      30         51         81          41    
204...............................................................      31         51         81          41    
205...............................................................      31         51         82          41    
206...............................................................      31         52         82          41    
207...............................................................      31         52         83          41    
208...............................................................      31         52         83          42    
209...............................................................      31         52         84          42    
210...............................................................      32         52         84          42    
211...............................................................      32         53         84          42    
212...............................................................      32         53         85          42    
213...............................................................      32         53         85          43    
214...............................................................      32         54         85          43    
215...............................................................      32         54         86          43    
216...............................................................      32         54         87          43    
217...............................................................      33         54         87          43    
218...............................................................      33         55         87          43    
219...............................................................      33         55         88          43    
220...............................................................      33         55         88          44    
221...............................................................      33         55         89          44    
222...............................................................      33         56         89          44    
223...............................................................      33         56         89          45    
224...............................................................      34         56         89          45    
225...............................................................      34         56         90          45    
226...............................................................      34         57         90          45    
227...............................................................      34         57         91          45    
228...............................................................      34         57         91          46    
229...............................................................      34         57         92          46    
230...............................................................      35         57         92          46    
231...............................................................      35         58         92          46    
232...............................................................      35         58         93          46    
233...............................................................      35         58         93          47    
234...............................................................      35         59         93          47    
235...............................................................      35         59         94          47    
236...............................................................      35         59         95          47    
237...............................................................      36         59         95          47    
238...............................................................      36         60         95          47    
239...............................................................      36         60         96          47    
240...............................................................      36         60         96          48    
241...............................................................      36         60         97          48    
242...............................................................      36         61         97          48    
243...............................................................      36         61         97          49    
244...............................................................      37         61         97          49    
245...............................................................      37         61         98          49    
246...............................................................      37         62         98          49    
247...............................................................      37         62         99          49    
248...............................................................      37         62         99          50    
249...............................................................      37         62        100          50    
250...............................................................      38         62        100          50    
251...............................................................      38         63        100          50    
252...............................................................      38         63        101          50    
253...............................................................      38         63        101          51    
254...............................................................      38         64        101          51    
255...............................................................      38         64        102          51    
256...............................................................      38         64        103          51    
257...............................................................      39         64        103          51    
258...............................................................      39         65        103          51    
259...............................................................      39         65        104          51    
260...............................................................      39         65        104          52    
261...............................................................      39         65        105          52    
262...............................................................      39         66        105          52    
263...............................................................      39         66        105          53    

[[Page 110]]

                                                                                                                
264...............................................................      40         66        105          53    
265...............................................................      40         66        106          53    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    For M&IE rates greater than $265, allocate 15%, 25%, and 40% of the 
total to breakfast, lunch, and dinner, respectively. The remainder is 
the incidental expense allowance.

[FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41535, Oct. 12, 1990]

[[Page 111]]


<R02>
                   CHAPTER 302--RELOCATION ALLOWANCES


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

Part                                                                Page
302-1           Applicability, general rules, and 
                    eligibility conditions..................         112
302-2           Allowances for subsistence and 
                    transportation..........................         136
302-3           Allowance for miscellaneous expenses........         139
302-4           Allowance for Househunting trip expenses....         141
302-5           Allowance for temporary quarters subsistence 
                    expenses................................         145
302-6           Allowance for expenses incurred in 
                    connection with residence transactions..         151
302-7           Transportation of mobile homes..............         159
302-8           Transportation and temporary storage of 
                    household goods and professional books, 
                    papers, and equipment...................         161
302-9           Allowances for nontemporary storage of 
                    household goods.........................         168
302-10          Allowances for transportation and emergency 
                    storage of a privately owned vehicle....         171
302-11          Relocation income tax (RIT) allowance.......         179
302-12          Use of a relocation services company........         221
302-14          Home marketing incentive payments...........         225
302-15          Allowance for property management services..         227

[[Page 112]]


<R03>
PART 302-1--APPLICABILITY, GENERAL RULES, AND ELIGIBILITY CONDITIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


           Subpart A--New Appointees and Transferred Employees

Sec.
302-1.1  Authority.
302-1.2  Applicability.
302-1.3  General provisions.
302-1.4  Definitions.
302-1.5  Service agreements.
302-1.6  Time limits for beginning travel and transportation.
302-1.7  Short distance involved.
302-1.8  Two or more family members employed.
302-1.9  Reduction in force involved.
302-1.10  New appointees.
302-1.11  [Reserved]
302-1.12  Overseas assignment and return.
302-1.13  Overseas tour renewal agreement travel.
302-1.14  Use of funds.
302-1.15  Waiver of limitations for an employee relocating to or from a 
          remote or isolated location.

    Subpart B--Relocation Entitlements Upon Separation for Retirement

302-1.100  Applicability.
302-1.101  Eligibility criteria.
302-1.102  Agency authorization or approval.
302-1.103  Allowable expenses.
302-1.104  Expenses not allowable.
302-1.105  Origin and destination.
302-1.106  Time limits for beginning travel and transportation.
302-1.107  Use of funds.

            Subpart C--Employee's Temporary Change of Station

302-1.200  What is a ``temporary change of station (TCS)''?
302-1.201  What is the purpose of a TCS?
302-1.202  Am I eligible for a TCS?
302-1.203  Who is not eligible for a TCS?
302-1.204  Must my agency authorize a TCS when I am directed to perform 
          a long-term assignment at a temporary official station?
302-1.205  Under what circumstances will my agency authorize a TCS?
302-1.206  If my agency authorizes a TCS, do I have the option of 
          electing payment of temporary duty travel allowances instead?
302-1.207  How long must my assignment be for me to qualify for a TCS?
302-1.208  What is the effect on my TCS reimbursement if my assignment 
          lasts less than 6 months?
302-1.209  What is the effect on my TCS reimbursement if my assignment 
          lasts more than 30 months?
302-1.210  Is there any required minimum distance between an official 
          station and a long-term assignment location that must be met 
          for me to qualify for a TCS?
302-1.211  Must I sign a service agreement to qualify for a TCS?
302-1.212  What is my official station during my long-term assignment?

                      Expenses Paid Upon Assignment

302-1.213  What expenses must my agency pay for a TCS upon my 
          assignment?
302-1.214  What expenses may my agency pay for a TCS upon my assignment?

                     Expenses Paid During Assignment

302-1.215  If my agency authorizes a TCS, will it pay for nontemporary 
          storage of my household goods?
302-1.216  How long may my agency pay for nontemporary storage of my 
          household goods?
302-1.217  Is there any limitation on the combined weight of household 
          goods I may transport or nontemporarily store at Government 
          expense?
302-1.218  What are the income tax consequences if my agency pays for 
          nontemporary storage of my household goods?
302-1.219  Will my agency pay for property management services when I am 
          authorized a TCS?
302-1.220  What is the property for which my agency will pay for 
          property management services?
302-1.221  How long will my agency pay for property management services?
302-1.222  What are the income tax consequences when my agency pays for 
          property management services?

  Expenses Paid Upon Completion of Assignment or Upon Separation From 
                           Government Service

302-1.223  What expenses will my agency pay when I complete my long-term 
          assignment?
302-1.224  If I separate from Government service upon completion of my 
          long-term assignment, what relocation expenses will my agency 
          pay upon my separation?
302-1.225  If I separate from Government service prior to completion of 
          my long-term assignment, what relocation expenses will my 
          agency pay upon my separation?

[[Page 113]]

302-1.226  If I have been authorized successive temporary changes of 
          station and reassigned from one temporary official station to 
          another, what expenses will my agency pay upon completion of 
          my last assignment or my separation from Government service?

           Permanent Assignment to Temporary Official Station

302-1.227  How is payment of my TCS expenses affected if I am 
          permanently assigned to my temporary official station?
302-1.228  What relocation allowances may my agency pay when I am 
          permanently assigned to my temporary official station?
302-1.229  If I am permanently assigned to my temporary official 
          station, is there any limitation on the weight of household 
          goods I may transport at Government expense to my official 
          station?
302-1.230  Are there any relocation allowances my agency may not pay if 
          I am permanently assigned to my temporary official station?

   Subpart D--Agency Responsibilities for Temporary Change of Station

302-1.300  How should we administer our TCS program?
302-1.301  What governing policies must we establish for our TCS 
          program?
302-1.302  What factors should we consider in determining whether to 
          authorize a TCS for a long-term assignment?

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5738; 20 U.S.C. 905(a); E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13474, 
3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: 54 FR 20306, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
           Subpart A--New Appointees and Transferred Employees


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.1  Authority.

    This chapter is issued pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 5721-5734 and 20 U.S.C. 
905(a).

[54 FR 20306, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.2  Applicability.

    (a) Persons covered. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, 
the following persons are covered:
    (1) Civilian officers and employees upon transfer from one official 
station or agency to another for permanent duty.
    (2) Civilian officers and employees of the United States Postal 
Service transferred under 39 U.S.C. 1006 from the Postal Service to an 
agency as defined in 5 U.S.C. 5721 for permanent duty.
    (3) Civilian officers and employees assigned to posts of duty 
outside the continental United States in connection with overseas tour 
renewal agreement travel and upon return to places of residence for the 
purpose of separation.
    (4) New appointees to any position.
    (5) Student trainees assigned upon completion of college work to any 
position.
    (6) Department of Defense overseas dependents school system 
teachers.
    (7) Career appointees to the Senior Executive Service (SES), and 
prior SES appointees who have elected to retain SES retirement benefits, 
upon their retirement and return to the place the individual has elected 
to reside.
    (b) Persons excluded. This chapter shall not apply to:
    (1) Officers and employees transferred in accordance with the 
provisions of the Foreign Service Act of 1980, as amended.
    (2) Officers and employees transferred in accordance with the 
provisions of the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949, as amended.
    (3) Persons whose pay and allowances are prescribed under title 37, 
United States Code, ``Pay and Allowances of the Uniformed Services.''
    (4) Personnel of the Veterans Administration to whom the provisions 
of 38 U.S.C. 235 apply.

[54 FR 20306, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23656, May 
23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 37, 59 FR 
27488, May 27, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.3  General provisions.

    (a) Travel covered--(1) Mandatory coverage. When change of official 
station or other action described in this paragraph is authorized or 
approved by such official or officials as the head of the agency may 
designate, travel and transportation expenses and applicable allowances 
as provided in this chapter (see applicability and exclusions in 
pertinent parts) shall be paid in the case of:
    (i) An employee transferring from one official duty station to 
another for permanent duty, provided the transfer is in the interest of 
the Government

[[Page 114]]

and is not primarily for the convenience or benefit of the employee or 
at his/her request; the transfer is to a new official station which is 
at least 10 miles distant from the old official station; and, in the 
case of a relatively short distance relocation, a determination of 
eligibility is made under Sec. 302-1.7(a) of this part;
    (ii) Eligible employees outside the continental United States 
traveling in connection with overseas tour renewal agreement travel;
    (iii) Eligible employees returning from posts of duty outside the 
continental United States to places of actual residence for separation 
as provided in Sec. 302-1.12 of this part; and
    (iv) Eligible individuals, as defined in Sec. 302-1.101 of this 
chapter, qualifying for ``last move home'' benefits upon separation from 
Government service as provided in subpart B of this part.
    (2) Discretionary coverage. The head of an agency, or his/her 
designee, may authorize the payment of travel and transportation 
expenses and applicable allowances in the case of:
    (i) A new appointee, as defined in Sec. 302-1.4(d), relocating from 
his/her place of actual residence at the time of appointment (or at the 
time following the most recent Presidential election, but before 
selection or appointment, in the case of an individual who has performed 
transition activities under section 3 of the Presidential Transition Act 
of 1963 (3 U.S.C. 102 note) and who is appointed in the same fiscal year 
as the Presidential inauguration that immediately follows his/her 
transition activities) for permanent duty to an official station; and
    (ii) An employee authorized a temporary change of station under 
subpart C of this part in connection with the employee s long-term 
assignment to a temporary official station.
    (b) Reasonable advance notice of reassignment or transfer. As 
provided in 5 U.S.C. 5724(j), ``the reassignment or transfer of any 
employee, for permanent duty, from one official station or agency to 
another which is outside the employee's commuting area shall take effect 
only after the employee has been given advance notice for a reasonable 
period. Emergency circumstances shall be taken into account in 
determining whether the period of advance notice is reasonable.'' 
Agencies shall give as much advance notice as possible to enable the 
employee to begin the arrangements necessary when relocating family and 
residence. However, see Sec. 302-1.7 governing payment of travel and 
transportation expenses and applicable allowances when short distances 
are involved. A reasonable period of advance notice should not be less 
than 30 days except when:
    (1) The employee and both the losing and gaining agencies agree on a 
lesser period;
    (2) Other statutory authority and implementing regulations stipulate 
a lesser period (see Office of Personnel Management regulations for 
specified timeframes); or
    (3) Emergency circumstances prevail.
    (c) Travel authorization. When it is determined that a relocation 
will be authorized at Government expense, a written travel authorization 
shall be issued to the new appointee or employee before he/she reports 
to the first or new official station. The agency should advise the 
employee, or individual selected for appointment, not to incur 
relocation expenses in anticipation of a relocation until he/she has 
received written notification. The travel authorization shall indicate 
the specific allowances which are authorized as provided in this chapter 
and provide instructions on the Federal procedures for procurement of 
travel and transportation services. The guidelines in Sec. 301-1.102 of 
this title on issuance of travel authorizations shall be followed. See 
also Sec. 302-1.10(c) for procedural requirements applicable to new 
appointees.
    (d) Applicable provisions for reimbursement purposes. Because of 
successive changes to the statutes and the regulatory provisions 
governing relocation allowances and the extended period of time that 
employees retain eligibility for certain allowances (see Secs. 302-1.6 
and 302-6.1(e)), the reimbursement maximums or limitations applicable to 
certain allowances will not be the same for all employees even though 
claims may be filed within the same timeframe. The regulatory provisions 
in effect on the employee's or new appointee's effective date of 
transfer or appointment (see Sec. 302-1.4(l)) shall be

[[Page 115]]

used for payment or reimbursement purposes.

[54 FR 20306, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 9, 55 FR 10778, Mar. 
23, 1990; FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23656, May 23, 1991; 56 FR 28589, June 21, 
1991; 56 FR 40946, Aug. 16, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28634, 28635, June 
26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58243, Oct. 29, 1993; FTR Amdt. 64, 62 FR 
13771, Mar. 21, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.4  Definitions.

    As used in this chapter, and unless otherwise specifically provided 
in this chapter, the following definitions apply:
    (a) Continental United States. Continental United States (or CONUS) 
means the 48 contiguous States and the District of Columbia.
    (b) United States. United States means the 50 States and the 
District of Columbia. The terms United States and the 50 States and the 
District of Columbia are used interchangeably throughout this chapter.
    (c) Employee. A civilian officer or employee of an agency as defined 
in paragraph (e) of this section. The term also includes new appointees 
as defined in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (d) New appointee. New appointee includes any person newly appointed 
to Government service, including an individual who has performed 
transition activities under section 3 of the Presidential Transition Act 
of 1963 (3 U.S.C. 102 note) and who is appointed in the same fiscal year 
as the Presidential inauguration that immediately follows his/her 
transition activities. New appointee also includes an individual 
appointed after a break in service except that an employee separated as 
a result of reduction in force or transfer of function may be treated as 
a transferee instead of a new appointee under the conditions set out in 
Sec. 302-1.9. In addition, for purposes of chapters 301-304 of this 
title, the term new appointee includes a student trainee who is assigned 
upon completion of college work.
    (e) Agency. For purposes of this chapter, agency means:
    (1) An Executive agency as defined in 5 U.S.C. 105 (an executive 
department, an independent establishment, the General Accounting Office, 
or a wholly owned Government corporation as defined in section 101 of 
the Government Corporation Control Act, as amended, but excluding a 
Government controlled corporation);
    (2) A military department;
    (3) A court of the United States;
    (4) The Administrative Office of the United States Courts;
    (5) The Federal Judicial Center;
    (6) The Library of Congress;
    (7) The United States Botanic Garden;
    (8) The Government Printing Office; and
    (9) The District of Columbia.
    (f) Immediate family. (1) Any of the following named members of the 
employee's household at the time he/she reports for duty at the new 
permanent duty station or performs authorized or approved overseas tour 
renewal agreement travel or separation travel:
    (i) Spouse;
    (ii) Children of the employee or employee's spouse who are unmarried 
and under 21 years of age or who, regardless of age, are physically or 
mentally incapable of self-support. (The term ``children'' shall include 
natural offspring; stepchildren; adopted children; grandchildren, legal 
minor wards, or other dependent children who are under legal 
guardianship of the employee or employee's spouse; and a child born 
after the employee's effective date of transfer when the travel of the 
employee's expectant spouse to the new official station is prevented at 
the time of the transfer because of advanced stage of pregnancy, or 
other reasons acceptable to the agency concerned, e.g., awaiting 
completion of the school year by other children.);
    (iii) Dependent parents (including step- and legally adoptive 
parents) of the employee or employee's spouse (see paragraph (f)(2) of 
this section for dependent status criteria); and
    (iv) Dependent brothers and sisters (including step- and legally 
adoptive brothers and sisters) of the employee or employee's spouse who 
are unmarried and under 21 years of age or who, regardless of age, are 
physically or mentally incapable of self-support. (See paragraph (f)(2) 
of this section for dependent status criteria.)
    (2) Generally, the individuals named in paragraphs (f)(1) (iii) and 
(iv) of this

[[Page 116]]

section shall be considered dependents of the employee if they receive 
at least 51 percent of their support from the employee or employee's 
spouse; however, this percentage of support criteria shall not be the 
decisive factor in all cases. These individuals may also be considered 
dependents for the purposes of this chapter if they are members of the 
employee's household and, in addition to their own income, receive 
support (less than 51 percent) from the employee or employee's spouse 
without which they would be unable to maintain a reasonable standard of 
living.
    (g) Temporary storage. Storage of household goods for a limited 
period of time at origin, destination, or en route in connection with 
transportation to, from, or between official stations or posts of duty 
or authorized alternate points.
    (h) Nontemporary storage. Storage of household goods while an 
employee is assigned to or is at an official station or post of duty to 
which he/she will not or cannot transport such household goods.
    (i) Mobile home. Any type of house trailer or mobile dwelling 
constructed for use as a residence and designed to be moved overland, 
either by self-propulsion or towing. Also, a boat when used as the 
employee's primary residence.
    (j) Household goods. (1) All personal property associated with the 
home and all personal effects belonging to an employee and the immediate 
family when shipment or storage begins, which can be legally accepted 
and transported as household goods by an authorized commercial carrier 
in accordance with the rules and regulations established or approved by 
an appropriate Federal or State regulatory authority, except the items 
excluded in this paragraph. Snowmobiles and vehicles with two or three 
wheels, e.g., motorcycles, mopeds, and golf carts, may be shipped as 
household goods. The following items are specifically excluded from the 
definition of household goods:
    (i) Automobiles, trucks, vans and similar motor vehicles; boats; 
airplanes; mobile homes; camper trailers; and farming vehicles;
    (ii) Live animals, birds, fowls, and reptiles;
    (iii) Cordwood and building materials; and
    (iv) Property for resale, disposal, or commercial use rather than 
for use by the employee or the immediate family; and
    (v) Any property or items which carriers' tariffs prohibit carriers 
from accepting for shipment. Agencies are advised to consult applicable 
tariffs or to contact the carrier involved if problems arise concerning 
shipment of the following prohibited articles:
    (A) Property liable to impregnate or otherwise damage equipment or 
other property (e.g., hazardous articles including explosives, flammable 
and corrosive materials, and poisons);
    (B) Articles which cannot be taken from the premises without damage 
to the article or the premises;
    (C) Perishable articles, including frozen foods, articles requiring 
refrigeration, or perishable plants unless: the shipment is to be 
transported not more than 150 miles and/or delivery accomplished within 
24 hours from the time of loading; no storage of shipment is required; 
and no preliminary or enroute servicing or watering or other 
preservative method is required of the carrier.
    (2) Items which are irreplaceable or are of extreme value or 
sentiment are not provided special security by the carrier even though 
extra-value insurance may be purchased. Employees and their immediate 
families are advised to personally transport these types of items.
    (k) Official station or post of duty. The building or other place 
where the officer or employee regularly reports for duty. (For 
eligibility for change of station allowances, see Secs. 302-1.3 and 302-
1.7.) With respect to entitlement under this chapter relating to the 
residence and the household goods and personal effects of an employee, 
official station or post of duty also means the residence or other 
quarters from which the employee regularly commutes to and from work. 
However, where the official station or post of duty is in a remote area 
where adequate family housing is not available within reasonable daily 
commuting distance, residence includes the dwelling where the family of 
the employee resides or will reside, but

[[Page 117]]

only if such residence reasonably relates to the official station as 
determined by an appropriate administrative official.
    (l) Effective date of transfer or appointment. The date on which an 
employee or new appointee reports for duty at his/her new or first 
official station.

[54 FR 20306, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23656, May 
23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 20, 56 FR 46989, Sept. 17, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 
28634, 28635, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.5  Service agreements.

    (a) Transfers within the continental United States and appointments 
and assignments of new appointees and student trainees to any position 
within the United States. In connection with the transfer of employees 
between official stations within the continental United States, expenses 
authorized under this chapter shall not be allowed until the employee 
selected for such transfer agrees in writing to remain in the service of 
the Government for 12 months following the effective date of the 
transfer, unless separated for reasons beyond his/her control that are 
acceptable to the agency concerned. In case of a violation of such an 
agreement, including failure to effect the transfer, any funds expended 
by the United States for expenses authorized under this chapter shall be 
recoverable from the individual concerned as a debt due the United 
States. Such an agreement also is required from new appointees and 
student trainees appointed or assigned to any position within the United 
States, as a condition of payment for travel, transportation, moving 
and/or storage of household goods, and allowances as provided in 
Sec. 302-1.10. A signed agreement for 12 months' service shall be 
required for each permanent change of station.
    (b) Transfers, appointments, and separations involving posts of duty 
outside the continental United States. (1) In connection with the 
transfer or appointment of employees to posts of duty outside the 
continental United States, or between posts located in (i) separate 
countries, (ii) separate areas of the United States located outside the 
continental United States (e.g., Alaska, Hawaii, the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico), or (iii) any combination of these areas, the expenses of 
travel, transportation, moving and/or storage of household goods, and 
other applicable allowances as provided in this chapter shall not be 
allowed unless and until the employee selected for such transfer or 
appointment agrees in writing to remain in the service of the Government 
for 12 months following the effective date of the transfer or 
appointment (or for 1 school year for Department of Defense overseas 
dependents school system teachers as determined under chapter 25 of 
title 20 of the United States Code), unless separated for reasons beyond 
his/her control and acceptable to the agency concerned. In case of a 
violation of such an agreement, including failure to effect the 
transfer, any funds expended by the United States for such travel, 
transportation, and allowances shall be recoverable from the individual 
concerned as a debt due the United States.
    (2) Except as precluded by this chapter, upon separation from 
service, the expenses for return travel, transportation, and moving and/
or storage of household goods shall be allowed whether the separation is 
for the purposes of the Government or for personal convenience. However, 
such expenses shall not be allowed unless:
    (i) The employee transferred or appointed to posts of duty outside 
the continental United States shall have served for a minimum period of 
not less than 1 nor more than 3 years prescribed in advance by the head 
of the agency (or for 1 school year for Department of Defense overseas 
dependents school system teachers as determined under chapter 25 of 
title 20, United States Code); or
    (ii) Separation is for reasons beyond the control of the individual 
and acceptable to the agency concerned.
    (3) The head of the agency also shall consider requiring a service 
agreement in connection with the transfer of employees not otherwise 
covered by this subpart. The agreement shall provide that in determining 
any employee indebtedness for violation of such agreement, credit shall 
be given to the extent of any unused entitlements he/she may have earned 
for return travel and transportation to his/her place of actual 
residence for separation.

[[Page 118]]

    (c) Employee liability. The agreement to remain in the service of 
the Government for 12 months following the effective date of transfer is 
not voided by a subsequent transfer whether such subsequent transfer is 
at the employee's request or in the interest of the Government, nor is 
such agreement voided by another service agreement made in connection 
with a second transfer. The liability of the employee for any funds 
expended by the United States for his/her travel, transportation, and 
relocation allowances is a separate liability for each service 
agreement. The liability in each instance is effective for the full 12-
month period in connection with the transfer for which the service 
agreement was made.

[54 FR 20306, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 16, 56 FR 15050, 
Apr. 15, 1991; FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23656, May 23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 
FR 28635, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.6  Time limits for beginning travel and transportation.

    All travel, including that for the immediate family, and 
transportation, including that for household goods allowed under this 
chapter, shall be accomplished as soon as possible. The maximum time for 
beginning allowable travel and transportation shall not exceed 2 years 
from the effective date of the employee's transfer or appointment, 
except that:
    (a) The 2-year period is exclusive of the time spent on furlough for 
an employee who begins active military service before the expiration of 
such period and who is furloughed for the duration of his/her assignment 
to the post of duty for which transportation and travel expenses are 
allowed;
    (b) The 2-year period does not include any time during which travel 
and transportation is not feasible due to shipping restrictions for an 
employee who is transferred or appointed to or from a post of duty 
outside the continental United States; and
    (c) The 2-year period shall be extended for an additional period of 
time not to exceed 1 year when the 2-year time limitation for completion 
of residence transactions is extended under Sec. 302-6.1(e).

[54 FR 20306, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.7  Short distance involved.

    (a) Transfers. When the change of official station involves a short 
distance (at least 10 miles between stations as provided in Sec. 302-
1.3(a)(1)) within the same general local or metropolitan area, the 
travel and transportation expenses and applicable allowances in 
connection with the employee's relocation of his/her residence shall be 
authorized only when the agency determines that the relocation was 
incident to the change of official station. Such determination shall 
take into consideration such factors as commuting time and distance 
between the employee's residence at the time of notification of transfer 
and his/her old and new posts of duty as well as the commuting time and 
distance between a proposed new residence and the new post of duty. 
Ordinarily, a relocation of residence shall not be considered as 
incident to a change of official station unless the one-way commuting 
distance from the old residence to the new official station is at least 
10 miles greater than from the old residence to the old official 
station. Even then, circumstances surrounding a particular case (e.g., 
relative commuting time) may suggest that the move of residence was not 
incident to the change of official station. (See also specific distance 
limitations applicable to individual allowances; i.e., househunting 
trips in Sec. 302-4.3(c) and eligibility for temporary quarters 
subsistence expenses in Sec. 302-5.4(b).)
    (b) Appointments. For new appointees, whose place of actual 
residence at the time of selection for appointment and first duty 
station are located in the same general local or metropolitan area and 
who relocate their places of residence as a result of the appointment, 
the travel and transportation expenses as provided in Sec. 302-1.10 
shall be authorized only when the agency determines that the relocation 
of residence was incident to the appointment. To the extent applicable, 
the principles prescribed for transferred employees shall be considered 
in making this determination.

[54 FR 20306, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23657, May 
23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 59, 62 FR 13756, Mar. 21, 1997; FTR Amdt. 63, 62 FR 
13768, Mar. 21, 1997]

[[Page 119]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.8  Two or more family members employed.

    (a) Members of the same immediate family who are employees. When two 
or more employees are members of the same immediate family, the 
allowances authorized under this chapter shall apply either to:
    (1) Each employee separately, in which instance none of the 
employees is eligible for any allowance as a member of the immediate 
family; or
    (2) Only one of the employees selected in accordance with paragraph 
(c) of this section, in which case the other employee(s) is eligible for 
allowances solely as a member(s) of the immediate family.
    (b) Non-employee members of the immediate family. When two or more 
employee members of the same immediate family elect separate allowances 
under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, non-employee members of the 
immediate family shall not receive duplicate allowances because of the 
fact that the employee members elected separate allowances.
    (c) Payment limitation. When employee members of the same immediate 
family elect separate allowances under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, 
the employing agency or agencies shall not make duplicate payment for 
the same expenses.
    (d) Procedures. A determination as to which of the two alternatives 
provided in paragraph (a) of this section is selected shall be made in 
writing and signed by all employee members of the same immediate family. 
When employee family members elect separate allowances under paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section, the determination also shall specify under which 
employee member's authorization non-employee family members will receive 
allowances. A copy of this determination shall be filed with the agency 
in which each employee member is employed.

[FTR Amdt. 20, 56 FR 46989, Sept. 17, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.9  Reduction in force involved.

    (a) Impending separation. When an employee is assigned to a new 
official station after having been notified of involuntary separation 
not for cause but incident to the reduction, cessation, or transfer of 
the work at the station where he/she was employed, the transfer of the 
employee is deemed to be in the interest of the Government unless there 
is an affirmative administrative determination that the transfer is 
primarily for the employee's convenience or benefit.
    (b) Reemployment after separation. A former employee separated by 
reason of reduction in force or transfer of function who within 1 year 
of the date of separation is reemployed by an agency for a nontemporary 
appointment, at a different permanent duty station from that where the 
separation occurred, may be allowed and paid the expenses and other 
allowances (excluding nontemporary storage when assigned to an isolated 
permanent duty station within the continental United States) in the same 
manner as though he/she had been transferred in the interest of the 
Government to the permanent duty station where reemployed, from the 
permanent duty station where separated, without a break in service, and 
subject to the eligibility limitations as prescribed in this chapter.

[54 FR 20306, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.10  New appointees.

    (a) Coverage. New appointees to any position are eligible for 
payment only of those travel and transportation expenses listed in 
paragraph (e) of this section in relocating to their first official 
station. New appointees include student trainees who are assigned upon 
completion of college work. New appointees include not only individuals 
when first appointed to Government service but also individuals 
appointed after a break in service except that employees separated as a 
result of reduction in force or transfer of function may be treated as 
transferees instead of new appointees under the conditions set forth in 
Sec. 302-1.9.
    (b) Authorization and eligibility--(1) Authority to pay. Agencies 
may pay the relocation expenses allowed in paragraph (e) of this section 
for new appointees determined eligible under paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section. However, once an agency has made the determination to pay 
relocation expenses in an individual case, it must pay all of

[[Page 120]]

the allowable relocation expenses contained in paragraph (e) of this 
section.
    (2) Eligibility determination. Each agency shall establish specific 
criteria for determining which new appointees qualify for payment of 
allowable relocation expenses. The Office of Personnel Management has 
issued guidelines in 5 CFR part 572 for agencies to follow in making 
these personnel determinations.
    (c) Agency responsibility. Because new appointees usually lack 
experience in Government procedures, each agency shall adopt special 
measures to provide full information to new appointees concerning the 
benefits which may be available to them for travel and transportation 
involved in reporting to their official stations. Special care shall be 
taken to inform appointees of the limitations on available benefits.
    (d) Procedural requirements--(1) Agreement. No payment for otherwise 
allowable expenses or for an advance of funds shall be made unless the 
appointee or student trainee has signed the agreement appropriate in 
his/her case as provided in Sec. 302-1.5.
    (2) Travel before appointment. Authorized expenses may be paid even 
though the individual concerned has not been appointed at the time 
travel to the first official station is performed. For individuals who 
have performed Presidential transition activities, as described in 
Sec. 302-1.3(a)(2), allowable travel and transportation may take place 
at any time following the most recent Presidential election. However, 
entitlement to such expenses does not vest by virtue of selection for 
the position or authorization for travel as provided in Sec. 302-1.3(c) 
but vests only upon actual appointment of the individual concerned. 
However, nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to limit the 
provisions of part 301-1, subpart C, allowing the payment of pre-
employment interview travel.
    (3) Prior payment. A student trainee may not receive payments at the 
time of his/her assignment if the expenses of travel and transportation 
were paid at the time he/she was appointed as a student trainee.
    (e) Allowable expenses. Items of expense listed in paragraphs (e) 
(1) through (6) of this section are payable under the conditions 
prescribed in this chapter governing the allowance in question. Note 
particularly that not all of the listed items will be applicable in each 
situation covered by this part.
    (1) Travel expenses including per diem for the appointee or student 
trainee as set forth in Sec. 302-2.1;
    (2) Transportation for immediate family of appointee or student 
trainee as set forth in Sec. 302-2.2(a);
    (3) Mileage if privately owned vehicle is used in travel as set 
forth in Sec. 302-2.3;
    (4) Transportation and temporary storage of household goods as set 
forth in part 302-8;
    (5) Nontemporary storage of household goods if appointed to an 
isolated location as set forth in Sec. 302-9.1; and
    (6) Transportation of mobile homes as set forth in part 302-7.
    (f) Expenses not allowable. Items of expense not listed in paragraph 
(e) of this section which are authorized for reimbursement in case of 
transfers under this chapter (e.g., per diem for family, cost of house-
hunting trip, subsistence while occupying temporary quarters, a 
miscellaneous expense allowance, residence sale and purchase expenses, 
lease-breaking expenses, and relocation services) are not allowable to 
appointees and student trainees eligible under this section.
    (g) Alternate origin and destination. The limit on travel and 
transportation expenses in each individual case is the cost of direct 
travel or transportation as allowable between the individual's place of 
residence at the time of selection or assignment (or in the case of 
individuals having performed Presidential transition activities, as 
described in Sec. 302-1.3(a)(2), the place of residence at the time of 
relocation following the most recent Presidential election) and the 
official station to which he/she is appointed or assigned; however, 
travel and transportation may be from and/or to other locations if the 
new appointee or student trainee pays any excess cost involved in such 
alternate travel or transportation.
    (h) Advance of funds. An advance of funds for expenses allowable 
under this section may be made to appointees and student trainees under 
the procedures prescribed in Sec. 302-1.14(a) and the part

[[Page 121]]

of this subtitle governing the allowance being considered.

[FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23657, May 23, 1991, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 
FR 28634, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58243, Oct. 29, 1993; FTR 
Amdt. 37, 59 FR 27488, May 27, 1994]
Sec. 302-1.11  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.12  Overseas assignment and return.

    (a) Transferees. Employees transferred to, from, and between 
official stations outside the continental United States are eligible for 
many of the benefits provided by this chapter, and employees transferred 
to such stations are eligible for return transportation under the 
conditions and limitations contained in paragraphs (c) through (g) of 
this section. Specific eligibility provisions and applicable limitations 
are contained in the parts of this chapter relating to the benefits 
provided.
    (b) New appointees--(1) Residence at time of appointment. A new 
appointee to a position outside the continental United States is 
eligible for certain travel and transportation benefits under this 
chapter if his/her residence at the time of appointment is in an area 
other than the area in which his/her official station is located. Under 
this rule ``area'' means a foreign country, the continental United 
States, Alaska, Hawaii, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or the 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or a United States 
territory or possession.
    (2) Allowable expenses. Allowances and the parts of this chapter 
which apply are as follows:
    (i) Travel and per diem for appointees as set forth in Sec. 302-2.1;
    (ii) Travel for the appointee's immediate family, but not per diem, 
as set forth in Sec. 302-2.2;
    (iii) Mileage to the extent travel is performed by privately owned 
automobile as set forth in Sec. 302-2.3;
    (iv) Transportation and temporary storage of household goods as set 
forth in part 302-8;
    (v) Nontemporary storage of household goods as set forth in 
Sec. 302-9.2;
    (vi) Transportation of mobile homes in limited circumstances as set 
forth in part 302-7; and
    (vii) Transportation of an employee's personal automobile as set 
forth in part 302-10.
    (3) Expenses not allowable. Items of expense not listed in paragraph 
(b)(2) of this section which are authorized for reimbursement under this 
chapter in the case of transfers (e.g., per diem for family, cost of 
house-hunting trip, subsistence while occupying temporary quarters, 
miscellaneous expense allowance, residence sale and purchase expenses, 
and lease-breaking expenses) may not be authorized for appointees 
eligible under this section.
    (4) Alternate origin or destination. Travel and transportation 
benefits authorized are from the employee's residence at time of 
appointment to his/her official station. If alternate origins or 
destinations are involved, the cost which will be paid by the Government 
may not exceed the cost that would have been incurred for the travel or 
transportation in question between the residence and the official 
station.
    (5) Advance of funds. An advance of funds for expenses allowable 
under paragraph (b)(2) of this section may be made to appointees under 
the procedures prescribed in Sec. 302-1.14(a) and the part of this 
chapter governing the allowance being considered.
    (c) Actual place of residence designation--(1) Designation by 
employee. When an employee is selected for transfer or appointment to a 
post of duty outside the continental United States, the place of actual 
residence shall be determined at the time of selection and designated in 
the written agreement prescribed in Sec. 302-1.5(b) to remain in the 
Government service for a minimum period of time prescribed by the agency 
head pursuant to law. An employee hired locally at a location outside 
the continental United States who claims residence at another location 
in the United States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or the 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or a United States 
territory or possession at time of appointment, shall designate in 
writing the claimed place of actual residence for the consideration of 
agency officials.
    (2) Determination by agency official. Determination of the place of 
actual

[[Page 122]]

residence shall be made by an authorized agency official on the basis of 
all the facts in the record. When there is doubt as to the place of 
actual residence, the employee is responsible for supplying any further 
information necessary to support designation of the claimed place of 
actual residence.
    (3) Guidance in determination of residence. While it is not feasible 
to establish rigid standards for what constitutes a place of residence, 
the concept of residence represented in an existing statutory provision 
(8 U.S.C. 1101(33)) may be used as general guidance. This concept views 
residence as the place of general abode, meaning the principal, actual 
dwelling place in fact, without regard to intent. Determination of the 
place of actual residence is primarily an administrative responsibility 
and the place constituting the actual residence must be determined upon 
the factual circumstances in each case. Examples of factors which shall 
be considered, whenever applicable, by agency officials charged with 
this responsibility are:
    (i) The place of actual residence of a dependent student generally 
is presumed to be the same as that of the parents and, except in rare 
instances, this situation would not be changed by the student attending 
college in another place.
    (ii) The place at which the employee physically resided at time of 
selection for appointment or transfer frequently constitutes the place 
of actual residence and shall be so regarded in the absence of 
circumstances reasonably indicating that another location may be 
designated as the place of actual residence.
    (iii) Designation of a place of actual residence in an official 
document signed by the employee earlier in Government employment shall 
be regarded as originally intended to be a continuing designation, and 
the burden is upon the employee to establish clearly that the earlier 
designation was in error or that later circumstances entitle a different 
designation to be made. After an employee has been transferred or 
appointed to a post of duty outside the continental United States, the 
location of the place of actual residence incorporated in the official 
records of such employment shall be changed only to correct an error in 
the designation of residence.
    (iv) Presence in the individual's work history of a representative 
amount of full-time employment at or in the immediate geographic area of 
the location designated as place of actual residence is a significant 
factor, but lack of such history does not preclude the designation of 
the location as place of actual residence.
    (v) The chronological record of individual or family association 
with a locality is usually significant only in connection with an 
analysis of other circumstances explaining the nature of such 
association. Frequent or extended visits to a locality must be evaluated 
in relation to the purpose of the visits and sometimes in relation to 
the nature of the area itself. For example, vacation visits to a resort 
area, without the added support of other factors, should not be regarded 
as adequate to establish a place of actual residence.
    (vi) Recognition and exercise by the employee of the privileges and 
duties of citizenship in a particular jurisdiction, such as voting and 
payment of taxes on income and personal property are factors for 
consideration, but agency application of standards about place of 
residence should not be such as to discourage employees from property 
ownership or participation in community affairs at a nonforeign location 
outside the continental United States.
    (d) Return for separation. When an employee is eligible for return 
travel and transportation to his/her place of actual residence upon 
separation after completion of the period of service specified in an 
agreement executed under Sec. 302-1.5(b) or is separated for reasons 
beyond his/her control and acceptable to the agency concerned, he/she 
may receive travel and transportation to an alternate location, provided 
the cost to the Government shall not exceed the cost of travel and 
transportation to his/her residence at the time he/she was assigned to 
an overseas station. However, under decisions of the Comptroller 
General, ordinarily, an employee is entitled to travel and

[[Page 123]]

transportation expenses upon separation only to the country of actual 
residence at the time of assignment to such duty.
    (e) Prior return of immediate family--(1) When employee is eligible 
for return transportation. When an employee has become eligible for 
return transportation by satisfactorily completing an agreed period of 
service at a post of duty outside the continental United States, the 
Government shall pay one-way transportation expenses for returning the 
employee's immediate family and household goods before the employee's 
return to his/her place of actual residence in the 50 States, the 
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or the 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or a United States 
territory or possession.
    (2) Return for compassionate reasons. One-way transportation 
expenses for the return of the employee's immediate family and his/her 
household goods also may be paid without regard to the employee's 
completion of an agreed period of service provided it has been 
determined under regulations prescribed by the head of the agency 
concerned that the public interest requires the return of the immediate 
family for compelling personal reasons of a humanitarian or 
compassionate nature, which may involve physical or mental health, death 
of a member of the immediate family, or obligations imposed by authority 
or circumstances over which the individual has no control.
    (3) Limited to one return trip. Expenses allowed as provided in 
paragraphs (e) (1) and (2) of this section shall be paid by the 
Government not more than one time during each agreed period of service 
and are subject to chapter 301 of this title.
    (4) Part of household goods retained overseas. In connection with 
the prior return of his/her family, the employee may elect to retain a 
portion of the household goods with him/her at the post of duty and ship 
the remainder to his/her place of actual residence. In such an instance, 
the Government will pay for shipment of both parts of the household 
goods, provided the aggregate weight of both shipments does not exceed 
the applicable weight limits.
    (5) Alternate destination. If the employee's immediate family and 
household goods are returned to a location in the 50 States, the 
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or the 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or a United States 
territory or possession other than the place of actual residence 
therein, the allowable expenses shall not exceed those allowable for 
return over a usually traveled route between the post of duty and the 
place of actual residence.
    (6) Prior return at employee's expense--reimbursement. There may be 
circumstances in which an employee elects to return his/her immediate 
family and the household goods or any part thereof at his/her own 
expense to any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands, or a United States territory or possession when he/she is not 
eligible for such transportation under this paragraph. In such an 
instance, and after the employee becomes eligible for transportation at 
Government expense, he/she may be reimbursed for the proper expenses 
which he/she had previously paid. He/She will be reimbursed in 
accordance with the applicable provisions of this paragraph only for 
expenses which are supported by receipts or other appropriate 
documentation furnished to the Government under regulations prescribed 
by the head of the agency concerned.
    (f) Return of former spouse and dependents. Paragraph (e) of this 
section also applies to the spouse and dependents of an employee who 
have traveled to the employee's overseas post of duty as dependents (as 
provided in Sec. 302-1.4(f)) at Government expense, even if, because of 
divorce or annulment, such individuals will have ceased to be dependents 
as of the date the employee becomes eligible for return travel. Travel 
of such former dependents is authorized by the employee's next 
entitlement to return travel but not beyond the end of the employee's 
current agreed tour of duty.
    (g) Return of family member over 21. If a member of the immediate 
family, as defined in Sec. 302-1.4(f), reaches his/her twenty-first 
birthday while the employee is assigned to duty overseas, that person 
may be returned to the

[[Page 124]]

United States (or foreign location at which the actual residence is 
located) at Government expense, provided his/her last travel overseas 
was at Government expense as a member of the employee's immediate 
family. Return of that person is authorized by the employee's next 
entitlement to travel to the United States (or foreign location at which 
the actual residence is located) but not beyond the end of the 
employee's current agreed tour of duty.

[54 FR 20306, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41536, 
Oct. 12, 1990; FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23657, May 23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 
FR 28635, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.13  Overseas tour renewal agreement travel.

    Employees may be eligible to receive allowances for travel and 
transportation expenses for the purpose of returning home to take leave 
between tours of duty overseas as provided in this section. These 
provisions are applicable to employees serving tours of duty at posts of 
duty outside the United States. These provisions are also applicable to 
employees serving tours of duty in Alaska or Hawaii but only under the 
conditions specified in paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) of this section.
    (a) Eligibility. Employees may be eligible to receive allowances for 
travel and transportation expenses for returning home between tours of 
duty overseas under the criteria set forth in paragraphs (a) (1) through 
(3) of this section.
    (1) Eligibility requirements for all areas outside the continental 
United States. In order to be eligible for allowances under this 
section, an employee before departure from his/her post of duty outside 
the continental United States must have:
    (i) Satisfactorily completed an agreed period of service or the 
prescribed tour of duty as provided in Sec. 302-1.5(b) for return travel 
entitlement;
    (ii) Entered into a new written agreement as provided in Sec. 302-
1.5(b) for another period of service at the same or another post of duty 
outside the continental United States. The agreement shall cover costs 
incident to the travel to the employee's place of actual residence or 
alternate location and return and any additional cost paid by the 
Government as a result of a transfer of the employee to another official 
station overseas at the time of the tour renewal agreement travel; but 
as provided in Sec. 302-1.5(b), the agreement will be for 12 months with 
respect to the transfer costs; and
    (iii) Qualified for eligibility status under the provisions of 
paragraphs (a) (2) and/or (3) of this section, if the post of duty 
involved is located in Alaska or Hawaii.
    (2) Employees stationed in Alaska or Hawaii on September 8, 1982. An 
employee whose status on September 8, 1982, was any one of the 
situations listed in paragraph (a)(2) (i), (ii), or (iii) of this 
section involving a post of duty in Alaska or in Hawaii will continue to 
be eligible to receive allowances for travel and transportation expenses 
for tour renewal agreement travel provided the employee continues to 
serve consecutive tours of duty at posts of duty within Alaska or at 
posts of duty within Hawaii. Transfers between a post of duty in Alaska 
and a post of duty in Hawaii will not constitute consecutive tours of 
duty for purposes of continuing eligibility under this section. On 
September 8, 1982, the employee must have been:
    (i) Serving a current tour of duty in Alaska or Hawaii;
    (ii) En route to a post of duty in Alaska or Hawaii under a written 
agreement to serve a tour of duty; or
    (iii) Engaged in tour renewal agreement travel and have entered into 
a new written agreement to serve another tour of duty in Alaska or in 
Hawaii.
    (3) Employees assigned, appointed, or transferred to a post of duty 
in Alaska or Hawaii after September 8, 1982. (i) Except for situations 
described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, the travel and 
transportation expenses allowable for tour renewal agreement travel 
under this section may not otherwise be authorized for employees 
assigned, appointed, or transferred to a post of duty in Alaska or 
Hawaii after September 8, 1982, unless it is determined under 
regulations prescribed by the agency head that payment of these expenses 
is necessary for the purpose of recruiting or retaining an employee for

[[Page 125]]

service of a tour of duty at a post of duty in Alaska or Hawaii. This 
authority must be used sparingly and only when required to fulfill 
agency staffing needs to accomplish the agency's mission. These 
provisions are intended to ensure the availability of well qualified 
employees or those employees with special skills and knowledge who are 
not available in the local area, and to fill positions in remote areas. 
Agency regulations shall prescribe criteria and guidelines to determine 
the need for payment of tour renewal agreement travel expenses. The 
agency determination that it is necessary to pay the expenses of tour 
renewal agreement travel as a recruiting or retention incentive in order 
to fill a particular position in Alaska or Hawaii shall be reviewed 
periodically but not less than every 5 years.
    (ii) The payment of travel and transportation expenses for tour 
renewal agreement travel for recruiting or retention purposes is limited 
to two round trips beginning within 5 years after the date the employee 
first begins any period of consecutive tours of duty in Alaska or 
Hawaii. Employees shall be advised in writing of this limitation.
    (4) Effect on other allowances. Paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) of this 
section do not affect the provisions of Sec. 302-1.12 governing overseas 
assignments and return for employees transferred or new appointees to 
posts of duty in Alaska and Hawaii.
    (b) Allowable travel and transportation--(1) Destination. An 
eligible employee and his/her immediate family shall be allowed expenses 
for travel from the post of duty outside the continental United States 
to his/her place of actual residence at the time of assignment to a post 
of duty outside the continental United States (also referred to as 
``actual residence'' in this section). Those expenses shall also be 
allowed from the place of actual residence upon return to the same or 
another post of duty outside the continental United States; except with 
respect to Alaska and Hawaii, the return must be to a post of duty 
located within the same State (Alaska or Hawaii) as the post of duty at 
which the employee served immediately before tour renewal agreement 
travel (see paragraph (a)(2) of this section).
    (2) Allowances. These allowances are payable under chapter 301 of 
this title and are limited to per diem and transportation costs for the 
employee and transportation costs, but not per diem, for his/her 
immediate family. (See Sec. 302-2.1.) If a transfer is also involved, 
family per diem may be paid as authorized by Sec. 302-2.2(b) to the 
extent such per diem is payable incident to direct travel between posts 
of duty.
    (3) Alternate destination. An employee and his/her family may travel 
to a location in the United States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or 
the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, a United States 
territory or possession, or another country in which the place of actual 
residence is located other than the location of the place of actual 
residence; however, an employee whose actual residence is in the United 
States must spend a substantial amount of time in the United States, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands, or a United States territory or possession incident to travel 
under this section to be entitled to the allowance authorized. The 
amount allowed for travel and transportation expenses when travel is to 
an alternate location shall not exceed the amount which would have been 
allowed for travel over a usually traveled route from the post of duty 
to the place of actual residence and for return to the same or a 
different post of duty outside the continental United States as the case 
may be.
    (c) Limitations--(1) Husband and wife both employed. If husband and 
wife are both employed in the immediate geographic area by the same or 
different agencies as employees under the terms of this chapter, the 
allowances authorized in this section shall apply to each of them 
separately, in which instance neither of them is eligible for any 
allowances as the spouse, or to either of them, in which instance one is 
considered the head of the household and the other is eligible for 
allowances as the spouse. In applying these alternatives, other members 
of the immediate family shall not receive duplicate allowances because 
of the fact that both

[[Page 126]]

husband and wife are employees. A determination as to which of the two 
alternatives is selected shall be made in writing and shall be signed by 
both husband and wife. A copy of this determination shall be filed with 
the agency in which each is employed.
    (2) Local hires not eligible--(i) Married persons in area with 
spouse. An employee hired locally is not eligible for allowances under 
this section if he/she is married and is in the immediate geographic 
area because his/her spouse is in the area as a member of the Foreign 
Service, a member of the uniformed services (as defined in title 37, 
U.S.C.), a private individual, or an employee of a private individual or 
a non-Federal organization.
    (ii) Minors in area with parents. An employee hired locally who is 
unmarried and under 21 years of age is not eligible for allowances under 
this section if a parent of the employee is in the immediate geographic 
area as a member of the Foreign Service, a member of the uniformed 
services (as defined in title 37, U.S.C.), a civilian employee under the 
terms of this subtitle, a private individual, or an employee of a 
private individual or a non-Federal organization.
    (iii) Denial of allowance to eligible local hires. Under regulations 
prescribed by the head of the agency concerned, the agency may in its 
discretion refuse eligibility for allowances under this subpart to an 
employee who was hired locally and who did not sign a written agreement 
as provided under Sec. 302-1.5(b), provided the agency notifies the 
employee of its intention before the employee has completed a period of 
service equal to the period generally applicable to employees of the 
agency serving at the post of duty concerned or in the same geographic 
area.
    (d) Liability of employee--noncompliance with new agreement. An 
employee who, for reasons not beyond his/her control and not acceptable 
to the agency concerned, fails to complete the period of service 
specified in a new service agreement is obligated for expenses and for 
allowances paid to him/her.
    (1) Failure to complete initial year of service. (i) If the employee 
fails to complete 1 year of service under a new agreement, he/she is 
indebted to the Government for any amounts spent by the Government for:
    (A) His/her transportation and per diem and transportation for his/
her immediate family incident to tour renewal agreement travel from the 
post of duty to his/her place of actual residence and from the place of 
actual residence to the last post of duty where he/she failed to 
complete a year of service;
    (B) Transportation for any member of the immediate family who 
traveled from the former to the last post of duty without going to the 
actual place of residence;
    (C) Transportation of his/her household goods from the former post 
of duty to the last post of duty (including amounts spent for packing, 
crating, drayage, unpacking, and temporary storage); and
    (D) Any other allowances paid under this subtitle when a transfer of 
official station is involved.
    (ii) In addition, the employee must bear the expense of 
transportation for himself/herself, and the family and household goods 
from the last post of duty to the place of actual residence, and he/she 
is indebted to the Government for any amounts spent by the Government 
for these purposes.
    (iii) The employee is entitled to an allowance if, prior to his/her 
current agreement which he/she did not complete, he/she completed an 
agreed period of service for which he/she did not receive all allowances 
to which he/she was entitled. The employee in such an instance is 
entitled to allowances for the return of himself/herself, and the family 
and household goods (including costs of packing, crating, drayage, 
unpacking, and temporary storage) from the post of duty at which the 
former period of service was completed to the actual place of residence.
    (iv) Since the employee did not avail himself/herself of the 
entitlement described in paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this section, the 
costs that would have been incurred for that purpose may be applied as a 
setoff against the indebtedness described in paragraphs (d)(1) (i) and 
(ii) of this section. The setoff amount shall be applied as follows:
    (A) If the amount of the setoff is less than the indebtedness, the 
difference is a debt due the United States; or

[[Page 127]]

    (B) If the setoff is larger than the indebtedness, the difference 
(excess setoff) will be applied to the costs, for which the employee is 
responsible, of moving the employee, and the family and household goods 
from the post of duty where he/she failed to complete a year of service 
to the place of actual residence. If the amount of excess setoff equals 
or exceeds the costs for which the employee is responsible, the 
Government will procure and pay for such transportation in full. If the 
amount of excess setoff is less than the costs for which the employee is 
responsible, the Government may procure and pay for the transportation 
and obtain reimbursement from the employee for the difference between 
the total costs and the amount of the excess setoff to be applied 
against the costs, or allow the employee to pay the total costs and 
reimburse him/her for the applicable amounts upon submission of an 
appropriate voucher.
    (2) Failure to complete agreed period after initial year. (i) If the 
employee completes 1 year or more of service under a new agreement, but 
does not complete the entire period of service specified in the 
agreement, he/she is not indebted to the Government for amounts spent by 
the Government for transportation and per diem for the employee and for 
transportation of his/her immediate family incident to tour renewal 
agreement travel from the post of duty at which he/she completed the 
previous tour of duty to his/her place of actual residence and from the 
place of actual residence to the post of duty at which he/she failed to 
complete the agreed upon tour of duty. Furthermore, if the post of duty 
where the employee failed to complete his/her agreement is not the same 
as the place where he/she did complete his/her previous assignment, he/
she is not indebted for the costs of transporting any members of the 
immediate family who traveled from the former to the latter post of duty 
without going to the actual place of residence, nor for the costs of 
transporting his/her household goods between these two posts of duty, 
including any related costs of packing, crating, drayage, unpacking, and 
temporary storage or for other allowances paid under this chapter 
incident to the transfer of official station.
    (ii) However, when the employee fails to complete the agreed period 
of service after the initial year, the employee must bear the costs of 
transportation for himself/herself and the immediate family and 
household goods from the post of duty at which he/she did not complete 
the agreed upon tour of duty under the new agreement to the place of 
actual residence.
    (iii) For the reasons described in paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this 
section, however, the employee shall be allowed credit for an amount 
equal to the costs of transporting, from the post of duty at which the 
former period of service was completed to the place of actual residence, 
the household goods and any members of the immediate family who did not 
accompany him/her when he/she returned to the place of actual residence 
incident to renewal agreement travel toward the costs (see paragraph 
(d)(2)(ii) of this section) of return to the place of actual residence.
    (iv) The credit amount allowable and the costs involved shall be 
computed in the same manner as provided in paragraph (d)(1)(iv) of this 
section.

[54 FR 20306, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41536, 
Oct. 12, 1990; FTR Amdt. 16, 56 FR 15050, Apr. 15, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 
57 FR 28635, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.14  Use of funds.

    (a) Advance of funds--(1) Basis. An employee may be advanced funds 
for use while traveling and for certain expenses which he/she may incur 
incident to a transfer based on his/her prospective entitlement to 
reimbursement for those expenses after they are incurred.
    (2) Rules. Advances and collection of advances by deduction from the 
employee's voucher are subject to chapter 301 of this title.
    (3) Anticipated entitlements which may justify an advance. The 
expected entitlement of an employee to reimbursement for the following 
expenses will form the basis for payment of a travel advance. Specific 
authority with regard to each type of expense is contained in the 
sections governing the particular allowances.
    (i) Per diem, mileage, and common carrier costs incident to his/her 
change

[[Page 128]]

of official station travel as set forth in Sec. 302-2.4;
    (ii) Authorized househunting trips as set forth in Sec. 302-4.16 of 
this chapter;
    (iii) Subsistence while occupying temporary quarters as set forth in 
Sec. 302-5.15 of this chapter;
    (iv) Transportation and temporary storage of household goods as set 
forth in Sec. 302-8.6;
    (v) Transportation of mobile homes as set forth in Sec. 302-7.5; and
    (vi) Transportation and emergency storage of employee's privately 
owned vehicle as set forth in Sec. 302-10.11 of this chapter.
    (b) Funding of transfers between agencies. In the case of transfer 
from one agency to another, allowable expenses shall be paid from the 
funds of the agency to which the employee is transferred. However, in 
transfers between agencies for reasons of reduction-in-force or transfer 
of functions, expenses allowable under this chapter may be paid in whole 
or in part by the agency from which the employee is transferred or by 
the agency to which he/she is transferred as may be agreed upon by the 
heads of the agencies concerned except as excluded in paragraphs (b) (1) 
and (2) of this section.
    (1) Nontemporary storage when assigned to an isolated permanent duty 
station within the continental United States; and
    (2) Transfers to, from, or between foreign countries (except the 
areas and installations in the Republic of Panama made available to the 
United States under the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 and related 
agreements (as described in section 3(a) of the Panama Canal Act of 
1979)).

[54 FR 20306, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, 
June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 59, 62 FR 13756, Mar. 21, 1997; FTR Amdt. 63, 
62 FR 13768, Mar. 21, 1997; FTR Amdt. 65, 62 FR 13794, Mar. 21, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.15  Waiver of limitations for an employee relocating to or from a remote or isolated location.

    The head of an agency or his/her designee may waive any limitation 
contained in subchapter II of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, 
or in any regulation (including this chapter) implementing those 
statutory provisions, for any employee relocating to or from a remote or 
isolated location when the following conditions are met:
    (a) The limitation if not waived would cause the employee to suffer 
a hardship; and
    (b) The head of the agency or his/her designee certifies in writing 
that the limitation is waived and the reason(s) for the waiver.

[FTR Amdt. 58, 62 FR 10709, Mar. 10, 1997]


<R04>
    Subpart B--Relocation Entitlements Upon Separation for Retirement


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.100  Applicability.

    (a) Individuals covered--(1) Career appointees to the Senior 
Executive Service (SES). The provisions of this subpart are applicable 
to career appointees in SES positions. For purposes of this subpart, the 
definitions in paragraphs (a)(1) (i) and (ii) of this section apply.
    (i) Career appointee as defined in 5 U.S.C. 3132(a)(4) means an 
individual in an SES position whose appointment to the position or 
previous appointment to another SES position was based on approval by 
the Office of Personnel Management of the executive qualifications of 
such individual.
    (ii) Senior Executive Service (SES) position as defined in 5 U.S.C. 
3132(a)(2) means:
    (A) Any position in an agency which is classified above GS-15 of the 
General Schedule pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 5108 or is in Level IV or V of the 
Executive Schedule; or
    (B) An equivalent position which is not required to be filled by an 
appointment by the President by and with the advice and consent of the 
Senate, and is a position which includes one or more of the duties 
listed in 5 U.S.C. 3132(a)(2).
    (2) Appointees who elect to retain SES retirement benefits. The 
provisions of this subpart are applicable to a non-SES appointee if the 
conditions listed in paragraphs (a)(2) (i) through (iii) of this section 
are met:
    (i) The appointee's basic rate of pay is at Level V of the Executive 
Schedule or higher;
    (ii) The appointee was previously a career appointee in the SES; and

[[Page 129]]

    (iii) The appointee elected under 5 U.S.C. 3392(c) to retain SES 
retirement benefits.
    (3) Medical Center Directors. The provisions of this subpart are 
applicable to individuals who:
    (i) Served as a director of a Department of Veteran's Affairs 
medical center under 38 U.S.C. 4103(a)(8) as in effect on November 17, 
1988;
    (ii) Separated from Government service on or after October 2, 1992; 
and
    (iii) Are not otherwise covered under paragraph (a) (1) or (2) of 
this section.
    (b) Immediate family of deceased covered individual. The provisions 
of this subpart apply to the immediate family of a covered individual, 
as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, who satisfies the 
eligibility criteria in Sec. 302-1.101, and who:
    (1) Died in Government service on or after January 1, 1994; or
    (2) Died after separating from Government service but before travel 
and/or transportation authorized under this subpart were completed.
    (c) Exclusions. The provisions of this subpart are not applicable to 
individuals whose appointment in the SES is a limited term, limited 
emergency, or noncareer appointment. (See 5 U.S.C. 3132(a) (5) through 
(7) for definitions of excluded types of appointment.)

[FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58243, Oct. 29, 1993, as amended by 62 FR 26374, 
May 13, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.101  Eligibility criteria.

    Upon separation from Federal service for retirement, a covered 
individual as defined in Sec. 302-1.100(a) of this subpart (or a 
deceased covered individual's immediate family as described in Sec. 302-
1.100(b)) is eligible for those travel and transportation allowances 
specified in Sec. 302-1.103 of this subpart, if such individual meets 
the following criteria:
    (a) Was transferred or reassigned geographically at any time in the 
interest of the Government and at Government expense from one official 
station to another for permanent duty in a position described in 
Sec. 302-1.100(a) of this subpart, including a transfer or reassignment:
    (1) From an SES career appointment to another SES career 
appointment;
    (2) From an SES career appointment to an appointment outside the SES 
at a rate of pay equal to or higher than Level V of the Executive 
Schedule, and the employee elects to retain SES retirement benefits 
under 5 U.S.C. 3392; or
    (3) From other than an SES career appointment, including an 
appointment in a civil service position outside the SES, to an SES 
career appointment;
    (b) At the time of the transfer or reassignment:
    (1) Was eligible to receive an annuity for optional retirement under 
section 8336(a), (b), (c), (e), (f), or (j) of subchapter III of chapter 
83 (Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS)) or under section 8412 of 
subchapter II of chapter 84 (Federal Employees Retirement System (FERS)) 
of title 5, U.S.C.; or
    (2) Was within 5 years of eligibility to receive an annuity for 
optional retirement under one of the authorities in paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section; or
    (3) Was eligible to receive an annuity based on discontinued service 
retirement, or early voluntary retirement under an OPM authorization, 
under section 8336(d) of subchapter III of chapter 83 or under section 
8414(b) of subchapter II of chapter 84 of title 5, U.S.C.;
    (c) Is separated from Federal service on or after September 22, 
1988;
    (d) Is eligible to receive an annuity upon such separation (or, in 
the case of death in Government service, met the requirements for being 
considered eligible to receive an annuity, as of the date of death) 
under the provisions of subchapter III of chapter 83 (CSRS) or chapter 
84 (FERS) of title 5, U.S.C., including an annuity based on optional 
retirement, discontinued service retirement, early voluntary retirement 
under an OPM authorization, or disability retirement; and
    (e) Has not previously been authorized and received ``last move 
home'' benefits upon separation from Federal service for retirement.

[FTR Amdt. 16, 56 FR 15050, Apr. 15, 1991; 56 FR 28796, June 24, 1991, 
as amended by FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58243, Oct. 29, 1993; 62 FR 26375, May 
13, 1997]

[[Page 130]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.102  Agency authorization or approval.

    Covered individuals. An individual who is eligible for moving 
expenses under this subpart shall submit a request to the designated 
agency official for authorization or approval of the moving expenses 
stating tentative moving dates and origin and destination locations of 
the planned move. Such requests shall be submitted in a format and 
timeframe as prescribed by agency policy and procedures.
    (b) Immediate family of deceased covered individual. Travel and 
transportation under this subpart are payable for the immediate family 
of a covered individual who died while in Government service during the 
period beginning on January 1, 1994, and ending October 6, 1994, upon 
the immediate family's written application submitted to the designated 
agency official by May 13, 1998.

[62 FR 26375, May 13, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.103  Allowable expenses.

    When the head of the agency concerned, or his/her designee, 
authorizes or approves, the travel and transportation expenses specified 
in this section shall be paid for those individuals who are eligible for 
such expenses under Sec. 302-1.101. Allowable expenses are as follows:
    (a) Travel expenses including per diem under Sec. 302-2.1 for the 
individual.
    (b) Transportation expenses under Sec. 302-2.2(a), but not per diem, 
for the individual's immediate family.
    (c) Mileage allowance under Sec. 302-2.3, to the extent travel is 
performed by privately owned automobile.
    (d) Transportation and temporary storage of household goods under 
part 302-8 not to exceed 18,000 pounds net weight.

[FTR Amdt. 16, 56 FR 15050, Apr. 15, 1991; 56 FR 28796, June 24, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.104  Expenses not allowable.

    Items of expense not listed in Sec. 302-1.103 which generally are 
authorized for reimbursement in the case of transferred employees; 
(e.g., per diem for family, cost of househunting trip, subsistence while 
occupying temporary quarters, miscellaneous expense allowance, residence 
sale and purchase expenses, leasebreaking expenses, nontemporary storage 
of household goods, relocation income tax allowance, and relocation 
services) are not authorized upon the eligible individual's retirement.

[FTR Amdt. 16, 56 FR 15050, Apr. 15, 1991, as amended by FTR Amdt. 32, 
58 FR 58244, Oct. 29, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.105  Origin and destination.

    (a) The expenses listed in Sec. 302-1.103 may be paid from the 
official station where separation of the eligible individual occurs to 
the place where the individual has elected to reside within the United 
States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or the Commonwealth of the 
Northern Mariana islands, a United States territory or possession, or 
the former Canal Zone area (i.e., areas and installations in the 
Republic of Panama made available to the United states under the Panama 
Canal Treaty of 1977 and related agreements (as described in section 
3(a) of the Panama Canal Act of 1979)); or if the individual dies before 
separating or after separating but before the travel and transportation 
are completed, expenses may be paid from the deceased individual's 
official station at the time of death or where separation occurred, as 
appropriate, to the place within the areas listed in this paragraph 
where the immediate family elects to reside even if different from the 
place elected by the separated eligible individual.
    (b) Travel and transportation expenses may be paid from an alternate 
origin or more than one origin provided the cost does not exceed the 
cost that the Government would have paid if all travel and 
transportation had originated at the official station from which the 
individual was separated to the place where the individual, or the 
immediate family, will reside.
    (c) This subpart comtemplates a move to a different georgraphical 
area. In the event the place where the individual has elected to reside 
is within the same general local or metropolitan area in which the 
official station or residence was located at the time of the 
individual's separation, the expenses authorized by this subpart may not 
be paid unless the mileage criteria

[[Page 131]]

specified in Sec. 302-1.7 for a short distance transfer are met.

[54 FR 29716, July 14, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 16, 56 FR 15050, 
Apr. 15, 1991; 56 FR 28796, June 24, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, 
June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58244, Oct. 29, 1993; 62 FR 26375, 
May 13, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.106  Time limits for beginning travel and transportation.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, all travel, 
including that for the separated covered individual, and transportation, 
including that for household goods, allowed under this subpart, shall be 
accomplished within 6 months of the date of separation (or date of death 
if the individual died before separating), or other reasonable period of 
time as determined by the agency concerned, but in no case later than 2 
years from the effective date of the individual's separation from 
Government service (or date of death if the individual died before 
separating).
    (b) For the immediate family of a covered individual who died in 
Government service between January 1, 1994 and May 13, 1997, all travel 
and transportation, including that for household goods, allowed under 
this subpart, shall be accomplished no later than May 13, 1999.

[62 FR 26375, May 13, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.107  Use of funds.

    Travel advances will not be issued to cover any of the expenses 
authorized by this subpart. Transportation expenses should be paid 
through the use of U.S. Government Transportation Requests and U.S. 
Government Bills of Lading to the maximum extent possible to minimize 
travel and transportation costs and the need for individuals to use 
personal funds. However, individuals who have been authorized or 
approved to make their own moving arrangements may be reimbursed for 
their actual transportation expenses not to exceed applicable coach air 
fares for transportation of the individual and immediate family, or the 
applicable allowances under the commuted rate schedule for moving and 
storage of the household goods.

[FTR Amdt. 16, 56 FR 15051, Apr. 15, 1991]


<R04>
            Subpart C--Employee's Temporary Change of Station

    Source: FTR Amdt. 64, 62 FR 13771, Mar. 21, 1997, unless otherwise 
noted.

    Note to subpart C: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.200  What is a ``temporary change of station (TCS)''?

    TCS means the relocation of an employee to a new official station 
for a temporary period while the employee is performing a long-term 
assignment, and subsequent return of the employee to the previous 
official station upon completion of that assignment.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.201  What is the purpose of a TCS?

    TCS provides agencies an alternative to a long-term temporary duty 
travel assignment to increase employee satisfaction and enhance morale, 
reduce the employee's income tax liability, and save the Government 
money.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.202  Am I eligible for a TCS?

    Yes, if you are an employee who is directed to perform a long-term 
assignment at a temporary location, and you otherwise would be eligible 
for payment of temporary duty travel allowances authorized under chapter 
301 of this subtitle. For exceptions, see Sec. 302-1.203.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.203  Who is not eligible for a TCS?

    The following individuals are not eligible for a TCS:
    (a) A new appointee;
    (b) An employee assigned to or from a State or local Government 
under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act (5 U.S.C. 3372, et. seq.);
    (c) An individual employed intermittently in the Government service 
as a consultant or expert and paid on a daily when-actually-employed 
(WAE) basis;
    (d) An individual serving without pay or at $1 a year; or
    (e) An employee assigned under the Government Employees Training Act 
(5 U.S.C. 4109).

[[Page 132]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.204  Must my agency authorize a TCS when I am directed to perform a long-term assignment at a temporary official station?

    No. Your agency determines the conditions under which a TCS is 
necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Government effectively and 
economically.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.205  Under what circumstances will my agency authorize a TCS?

    Your agency will authorize a TCS when:
    (a) You are directed to perform a long-term assignment at another 
duty station;
    (b) Your agency otherwise could authorize temporary duty travel and 
pay travel allowances, including payment of subsistence expenses, under 
chapter 301 of this subtitle for the long-term assignment;
    (c) Your agency determines it would be more advantageous, cost and 
other factors considered, to authorize a TCS; and
    (d) You meet any additional conditions your agency has established.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.206  If my agency authorizes a TCS, do I have the option of electing payment of temporary duty travel allowances instead?

    No.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.207  How long must my assignment be for me to qualify for a TCS?

    Not less than 6 months, nor more than 30 months.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.208  What is the effect on my TCS reimbursement if my assignment lasts less than 6 months?

    Your agency may authorize a TCS only when a long-term assignment is 
expected to last 6 months or more. If your assignment is cut short for 
reasons other than separation from Government service, you will be paid 
TCS expenses.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.209  What is the effect on my TCS reimbursement if my assignment lasts more than 30 months?

    If your assignment exceeds 30 months, your agency must permanently 
assign you to the temporary official station or return you to your 
previous official station. Your agency may not pay for nontemporary 
storage or property management services incurred after the last day of 
the thirtieth month. Your agency must pay the expenses of returning you 
and your immediate family and household goods to your previous official 
station unless you are permanently assigned to your temporary official 
station.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.210  Is there any required minimum distance between an official station and a long-term assignment location that must be met for me to qualify for a 
          TCS?

    No. Your agency may establish the area within which it will not 
authorize a TCS.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.211  Must I sign a service agreement to qualify for a TCS?

    No.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.212  What is my official station during my long-term assignment?

    Your official station is the location of your long-term assignment.

                      Expenses Paid Upon Assignment


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.213  What expenses must my agency pay for a TCS upon my assignment?

    Your agency must pay the following:
    (a) Travel, including per diem, for you and your immediate family 
under part 302-2 of this chapter;
    (b) Transportation and temporary storage of your household goods 
under part 302-8 of this chapter;
    (c) Transportation of a mobile home instead of transportation of 
household goods under part 302-7 of this chapter;
    (d) A miscellaneous expenses allowance under part 302-3 of this 
chapter;
    (e) Transportation of a privately owned vehicle(s) under part 302-10 
of this chapter; and
    (f) A relocation income tax allowance under part 302-11 of this 
chapter for additional income taxes you incur on payments your agency 
makes under the authority of this section and Sec. 302-1.214 for your 
relocation expenses.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.214  What expenses may my agency pay for a TCS upon my assignment?

    Your agency may pay the following:

[[Page 133]]

    (a) Househunting trip expenses under part 302-4 of this chapter; and
    (b) Temporary quarters subsistence expenses under part 302-5 of this 
chapter.

                     Expenses Paid During Assignment


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.215  If my agency authorizes a TCS, will it pay for nontemporary storage of my household goods?

    Yes, when nontemporary storage is necessary. Nontemporary storage 
expenses include necessary packing, crating, unpacking, uncrating, 
transporting to and from place of storage, charges while in storage, and 
other necessary charges directly related to storage.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.216  How long may my agency pay for nontemporary storage of household goods?

    For the duration of your long-term assignment.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.217  Is there any limitation on the combined weight of household goods I may transport or nontemporarily store at Government expense?

    Yes, the maximum combined weight is 18,000 pounds net weight. If you 
transport and/or nontemporarily store household goods in excess of the 
maximum weight allowance, you will be responsible for any excess cost.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.218  What are the income tax consequences if my agency pays for nontemporary storage of my household goods?

    You will be taxed on the amount of nontemporary storage expenses 
your agency pays. However, your agency will pay you a relocation income 
tax allowance under part 302-11 of this chapter for substantially all of 
the additional Federal, State and local income taxes you incur on the 
expenses your agency pays.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.219  Will my agency pay for property management services when I am authorized a TCS?

    Yes. Your agency will reimburse you directly for expenses you incur 
or make payments on your behalf to a relocation services company, if you 
so choose. The term ``property management services'' refers to a program 
provided by a private company for a fee, which assists you in managing 
your residence at your previous official station as a rental property. 
Services provided by the company may include, but are not limited to, 
obtaining a tenant, negotiating a lease, inspecting the property 
regularly, managing repairs and maintenance, enforcing lease terms, 
collecting the rent, paying the mortgage and other carrying expenses 
from rental proceeds and/or funds of the employee, and accounting for 
the transactions and providing periodic reports to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.220  What is the property for which my agency will pay for property management services?

    Only your residence at your previous official station.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.221  How long will my agency pay for property management services?

    For the duration of your long-term assignment.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.222  What are the income tax consequences when my agency pays for property management services?

    You will be taxed on the amount of property management expenses your 
agency pays, whether it reimburses you directly for your expenses or 
pays a relocation services company to manage your residence. However, 
your agency will pay you a relocation income tax allowance under part 
302-11 of this chapter for substantially all of the additional Federal, 
State and local income taxes you incur on the expenses your agency pays. 
You may wish to consult with a tax advisor to determine whether you will 
incur any additional tax liability, unrelated to your agency

[[Page 134]]

s payment of your property management expenses, as a result of 
maintaining your residence as a rental property.

  Expenses Paid Upon Completion of Assignment or Upon Separation From 
                           Government Service


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.223  What expenses will my agency pay when I complete my long-term assignment?

    Your agency will pay the following expenses in connection with your 
return to your previous official station:
    (a) Travel, including per diem, for you and your immediate family 
under part 302-2 of this chapter;
    (b) Transportation and temporary storage of your household goods 
under part 302-8 of this chapter;
    (c) Transportation of a mobile home instead of transportation of 
your household goods under part 302-7 of this chapter;
    (d) Temporary quarters subsistence expenses under part 302-5 of this 
chapter;
    (e) A miscellaneous expenses allowance under part 302-3 of this 
chapter;
    (f) Transportation of a privately owned vehicle(s) under part 302-10 
of this chapter; and
    (g) A relocation income tax allowance under part 302-11 of this 
chapter for additional income taxes you incur on payments your agency 
makes under the authority of this section for your relocation expenses.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.224 If I separate from Government service upon completion of my long-term assignment, what relocation expenses will my agency pay upon my separation?

    The same relocation expenses it would have paid had you not 
separated from Government service upon completion of your long-term 
assignment.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.225  If I separate from Government service prior to completion of my long-term assignment, what relocation expenses will my agency pay upon my 
          separation?

    If the separation is for reasons beyond your control that are 
acceptable to your agency, your agency will pay the same relocation 
expenses it would pay under Sec. 302-1.224 if you separated from 
Government service upon completion of the long-term assignment. If this 
is not the case, the expenses your agency pays may not exceed the 
reimbursement that you would have received under chapter 301 of this 
subtitle had you been auhorized to perform temporary duty travel for the 
duration of the long-term assignment.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.226  If I have been authorized successive temporary changes of station and reassigned from one temporary official station to another, what expenses 

          will my agency pay upon completion of my last assignment or my 
          separation from Government service?

    Your agency will pay the expenses authorized in Sec. 302-1.223 for 
your relocation from your current temporary official station to your 
last permanent official station.

           Permanent Assignment to Temporary Official Station


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.227  How is payment of my TCS expenses affected if I am permanently assigned to my temporary official station?

    Payment of TCS expenses stops once your temporary official station 
becomes your permanent official station. Your agency may not pay any TCS 
expenses incurred beginning the day your temporary official station 
becomes your permanent official station.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.228  What relocation allowances may my agency pay when I am permanently assigned to my temporary official station?

    Your agency may pay the following:
    (a) Travel, including per diem, under part 302-2 of this chapter for 
one round trip between your temporary official station and your previous 
official station for you and members of your immediate family who 
relocated to the temporary official station with you. Your agency may 
also pay the same expenses for a one-way trip from the previous official 
station to the new permanent official station for any immediate family 
members who did not accompany you to the temporary official station.
    (b) Residence transaction expenses under part 302-6 of this chapter;
    (c) Property management expenses under part 302-14 of this chapter;

[[Page 135]]

    (d) Residence-related relocation services expenses, (e.g. expenses 
under a homesale program, expenses for homefinding assistance, and 
property management services) under part 302-12 of this chapter;
    (e) Temporary quarters subsistence expenses under part 302-5 of this 
chapter;
    (f) Transportation of household goods not previously transported to 
the temporary official station under part 302-8 of this chapter; and
    (g) Transportation of a privately owned vehicle(s) not previously 
transported to the temporary official station under part 302-10 of this 
chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.229  If I am permanently assigned to my temporary official station, is there any limitation on the weight of household goods I may transport at 
          Government expense to my official station?

    Yes. You are limited to 18,000 pounds net weight. This maximum 
weight will be reduced by the weight of any household goods transported 
at Government expense to your temporary official station under your TCS 
authorization. Subject to the 18,000 pound limit, your agency will pay 
to transport any household goods in nontemporary storage to your 
official station. Additionally, if you change your residence as a result 
of your permanent assignment to your temporary official station, your 
agency may pay for transporting your household goods, subject to the 
18,000 pound limit, between the residence you occupied during your 
temporary assignment and your new residence.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.230  Are there any relocation allowances my agency may not pay if I am permanently assigned to my temporary official station?

    Your agency may not pay for the following:
    (a) Expenses of a househunting trip for you and your spouse to your 
temporary official station under part 302-4 of this chapter; or
    (b) Residence transaction expenses for selling a residence or 
breaking a lease at the temporary official station under part 302-6 of 
this chapter.


<R04>
   Subpart D--Agency Responsibilities for Temporary Change of Station

    Source: FTR Amdt. 64, 62 FR 13774, Mar. 21, 1997, unless otherwise 
noted.

    Note to subpart D: Use of the pronouns ``we'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.300  How should we administer our TCS program?

    To minimize your travel and relocation costs.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.301  What governing policies must we establish for our TCS program?

    Policies and procedures that govern:
    (a) When you will authorize a TCS, including whether you will impose 
a minimum distance between the employee s current official station and 
the proposed temporary official station for an employee to qualify for a 
TCS; and
    (b) Who will determine whether authorization of a TCS is appropriate 
in each situation.


<R05>
Sec. 302-1.302  What factors should we consider in determining whether to authorize a TCS for a long-term assignment?

    You should consider the following factors in determining whether to 
authorize a TCS:
    (a) Cost considerations. You should consider the cost of each 
alternative. A long-term temporary duty travel assignment requires the 
payment of either per diem or actual subsistence expenses for the entire 
period of the assignment. This could be very costly to the agency over 
an extended period. A TCS will require fairly substantial relocation 
allowance payments at the beginning and end of the assignment, and less 
substantial payments for nontemporary storage and property management 
services, when authorized, during the period of the assignment. Agencies 
should estimate the total cost of each alternative and authorize the one 
that is most advantageous for the agency, cost and other factors 
considered.
    (b) Length of the long-term assignment. You should consider the 
length of the

[[Page 136]]

long-term assignment. The purpose of temporary duty travel allowances is 
to reimburse an employee for additional costs, including subsistence 
costs, incurred as a result of performing official business away from 
his/her official station. An employee receives a salary intended to 
cover his/her living expenses, including subsistence costs, at the 
official station. When an employee performs a long-term assignment and 
obtains extended stay living accommodations with facilities not unlike 
those the employee has at the official station, the assignment 
characteristics may be more similar to subsisting at the official 
station than at a temporary duty station. When this situation occurs, 
payment of temporary duty travel allowances in addition to payment of 
salary creates an inequitable reimbursement situation between an 
employee performing official travel and an employee officially stationed 
at the same location. In this situation, you should strongly consider 
authorizing a TCS for a long-term assignment.
    (c) Tax considerations. An employee who performs a temporary duty 
travel assignment exceeding one year at a single location is subject to 
income taxation of his/her travel expense reimbursements. An employee 
who is authorized and performs a TCS also will be subject to income 
taxation of some, but not all, of his/her TCS expenses. You will pay an 
offsetting relocation income tax allowance on an employee's TCS expense 
reimbursements but unless specifically authorized by statute, you do not 
have authority to pay such an allowance for income taxes incurred on 
temporary duty travel reimbursements. You, therefore, should authorize a 
TCS if a long-term temporary duty assignment will result in an 
unreimbursable income tax liability on an employee.
    (d) Employee concerns. The long-term assignment of an employee away 
from his/her official station and immediate family may negatively affect 
the employee's morale and job performance. Such negative effects may be 
alleviated by authorizing a TCS so the employee can transport his/her 
immediate family and/or household goods at Government expense to the 
location where he/she will perform the long-term assignment. You should 
consider the effects of a long-term temporary duty travel assignment on 
an employee when deciding whether to authorize a TCS.


<R03>
PART 302-2--ALLOWANCES FOR SUBSISTENCE AND TRANSPORTATION--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
302-2.1  For the employee.
302-2.2  For members of an employee's immediate family.
302-2.3  For use of a privately owned automobile in connection with 
          permanent change of station.
302-2.4  Advance of funds.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5738; 20 U.S.C. 905(a); E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13474, 
3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.


<R05>
Sec. 302-2.1  For the employee.

    (a) Applicability. This part applies to travel of
    (1) Transferred employees,
    (2) New appointees, and
    (3) Employees assigned to posts of duty outside the continental 
United States in connection with either overseas tour renewal agreement 
travel or return travel to places of residence for the purpose of 
separation.
    (b) Payment for employee's travel expenses. Except as specifically 
provided in this chapter, an agency shall pay per diem, transportation 
costs, and other travel expenses of the employee in accordance with the 
provisions of 5 U.S.C. 5701-5709 and chapter 301 of this title. The 
prohibition in Sec. 301-7.5(b) of this title on paying per diem for 
travel of 12 hours or less applies to change of official station travel.
    (c) Maximum per diem rates for relocation travel--(1) Travel when en 
route between employee's old and new official stations. The maximum per 
diem rate for en route travel within CONUS between the employee's old 
and new official stations shall be the standard CONUS rate prescribed 
under Sec. 301-7.3 of this title.
    (2) Travel to seek residence quarters. The maximum per diem rate for 
travel to seek residence quarters shall be the lesser of the maximum per 
diem rate prescribed under Sec. 301-7.3 of this title for the locality 
where the employee

[[Page 137]]

seeks residence quarters or for the locality where the employee obtains 
lodging accommodations. An agency may prescribe the standard CONUS rate 
as the maximum per diem rate if it determines that establishment of such 
lower rate is advantageous to the Government.

[FTR Amdt. 54, 61 FR 68161, Dec. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 302-2.2  For members of an employee's immediate family.

    (a) Transportation. Except as specifically provided in this chapter, 
allowable travel expenses for the employee's immediate family, including 
transportation, are governed by chapter 301 of this title. Travel of the 
immediate family may begin at the employee's old official station or 
some other point, or partially at both, and may end at the new official 
station or some other place selected by the employee, or partially at 
both. However, the cost to the Government for transportation of the 
immediate family shall not exceed the allowable cost by the usually 
traveled route between the employee's old and new official stations.
    (b) Per diem allowance when en route between employee's old and new 
official stations. When an employee is transferred, an allowance shall 
be paid for per diem expenses incurred by the employee's immediate 
family while traveling between the old and new official stations 
regardless of where the old and new stations are located. If the actual 
travel involves departure and/or destination points other than the old 
or new official station, the per diem allowance shall not exceed the 
amount to which members of the immediate family would have been entitled 
if they had traveled by a usually traveled route between the old and new 
official stations. The prohibition in Sec. 301-7.5(b) of this title on 
paying per diem for travel of 12 hours or less applies to change of 
official station travel. The maximum allowable per diem rates are as 
follows:
    (1) For the spouse--(i) When accompanying the employee. When the 
spouse accompanies the employee who is traveling under Sec. 302-2.1, the 
spouse is authorized three-fourths of the per diem rate to which the 
employee is entitled. However, under this provision the minimum per diem 
rate shall be $6 unless the employee receives a per diem rate of less 
than $6 and, in that instance, the spouse will receive the same rate as 
the employee.
    (ii) When not accompanying the employee. When the spouse is not 
accompanying the employee while he/she is traveling under Sec. 302-2.1, 
the spouse is authorized the per diem rate to which the employee is 
entitled under Sec. 302-2.1. In such instance the travel time of the 
employee and the amount of per diem allowance paid him/her are not 
factors in computing the amount of per diem allowance for travel of the 
spouse. (When more than one privately owned automobile is used, the 
spouse shall be considered to have been accompanied by the employee if 
travel is performed on the same days along the same general route.)
    (2) For each other member of the employee's immediate family. Three-
fourths of the per diem rate to which the employee is entitled is 
authorized for each other member age 12 or older, and one-half of the 
per diem rate to which the employee is entitled is authorized for each 
child under 12 years of age. However, under this provision the minimum 
per diem rate shall be $6 unless the employee received a per diem rate 
of less than $6 and, in that instance, the member shall receive the same 
rate as the employee.
    (c) Exclusions. The provisions of paragraph (b) of this section do 
not authorize payment of per diem allowances for members of the 
immediate families of:
    (1) New appointees;
    (2) Employees assigned to posts of duty outside the continental 
United States in connection with overseas tour renewal agreement travel;
    (3) Employees assigned to posts of duty outside the continental 
United States returning to places of actual residence for separation; or
    (4) Employees assigned under the Government Employees Training Act 
(5 U.S.C. 4109).

[54 FR 20314, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41537, 
Oct. 12, 1990; FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23657, May 23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 54, 61 
FR 68161, Dec. 27, 1996]

[[Page 138]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-2.3  For use of a privately owned automobile in connection with permanent change of station.

    (a) Determination of advantage to the Government. When an employee, 
with or without an immediate family, who is eligible for travel 
allowances under part 302-1, uses a privately owned automobile for 
permanent change of station travel, that use is deemed to be 
advantageous to the Government. The provisions in Sec. 302-2.3 also 
apply to new appointees, and employees returning from posts of duty 
outside the continental United States to places of actual residence for 
separation. The provisions do not apply to employees assigned to posts 
of duty outside the continental United States in connection with 
overseas tour renewal agreement travel. (See Sec. 302-1.13.)
    (b) Mileage rates prescribed. Payment of mileage allowances, when 
authorized or approved in connection with the transfer, shall be allowed 
as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Mileage
                    Occupants of automobile                       rate  
                                                                 (cents)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Employee only; or one member of immediate family..............     15   
Employee and one member; or two members of immediate family...     17   
Employee and two members; or three members of immediate family     19   
Employee and three or more members; or four or more members of          
 immediate family.............................................     20   
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Mileage rates in special circumstances. Heads of agencies may 
prescribe that travel orders or other administrative determinations 
specify higher mileage rates at a rate not more than the maximum rate 
prescribed in Sec. 301-4.2(a)(1) of this title for individual transfers 
of employees or transfers of groups of employees when:
    (1) Employees are expected to use the privately owned automobiles on 
official business while assigned to the new duty stations;
    (2) The common carrier rates for the facilities provided between the 
old and new stations, the related constructive taxicab fares to and from 
terminals, and the per diem allowances prescribed under this part 
justify a higher mileage rate as advantageous to the Government; or
    (3) The costs of driving the privately owned automobile to, from, or 
between official stations located outside the continental United States 
justify a higher mileage rate as advantageous to the Government.
    (d) Maximum per diem allowances when privately owned automobile is 
used--(1) Rates as prescribed by agency. The per diem allowance for the 
employee while en route between the old and new duty stations shall be 
at appropriate rates, as prescribed by the agency concerned, within the 
applicable maximums and in accordance with provisions of Sec. 302-2.1 
and chapter 301 of this title. The per diem allowances prescribed in 
Sec. 302-2.2(b) apply for members of an employee's immediate family, 
except as excluded in Sec. 302-2.2(c).
    (2) Maximum allowance based on total distance. Per diem allowances 
should be paid on the basis of actual time used to complete the trip, 
but the allowances may not exceed an amount computed on the basis of a 
minimum driving distance per day which is prescribed as reasonable by 
the authorizing official and is not less than an average of 300 miles 
per calendar day. An exception to the daily minimum driving distance may 
be made by the agency concerned when travel between the old and new 
official stations is delayed for reasons clearly beyond the control of 
the travelers such as acts of God, restrictions by Governmental 
authorities, or other reasons acceptable to the agency; e.g., a 
physically handicapped employee. In such cases, per diem may be allowed 
for the period of the delay or for a shorter period as determined by the 
agency. The traveler must provide a statement on his/her reimbursement 
voucher fully explaining the circumstances which necessitated the en 
route travel delay. The exception to the daily minimum driving distance 
requires the approval of the agency's authorizing official.
    (3) Method of computation. In computing the per diem amount for a 
prescribed minimum driving distance per day, one-fourth of the 
prescribed per diem rate shall be allowed for each one-fourth of the 
prescribed minimum distance. For example, if the authorizing official 
prescribes a per diem rate of $12 for the employee and a reasonable 
minimum driving distance of 400 miles a day, the per diem amount will

[[Page 139]]

be $3 for each 100 miles or fraction of 100 miles traveled between the 
old and new official stations.
    (e) Use of more than one privately owned vehicle--(1) When 
authorized as advantageous to the Government. Use of no more than one 
privately owned automobile is authorized under this part as being 
advantageous to the Government in connection with permanent change of 
station travel except under the following special circumstances, when 
use of more than one privately owned automobile may be authorized:
    (i) If there are more members of the immediate family than 
reasonably can be transported with luggage in one vehicle;
    (ii) If because of age or physical condition special accommodations 
are necessary in transporting a member of the immediate family in one 
vehicle, and a second automobile is required for travel of other members 
of the immediate family;
    (iii) If an employee must report to a new official station in 
advance of travel by members of the immediate family who delay travel 
for acceptable reasons such as completion of school term, sale of 
property, settlement of personal business affairs, disposal or shipment 
of household goods, and temporary unavailability of adequate housing at 
the new official station;
    (iv) If a member of the immediate family performs unaccompanied 
travel between authorized points other than those for the employee's 
travel; or
    (v) If, in advance of the employee's reporting date, immediate 
family members must travel to the new official station for acceptable 
reasons such as to enroll children in school at the beginning of the 
term.
    (2) Allowances applicable. In those instances where more than one 
automobile is authorized under this paragraph, the allowances under 
paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section apply for each automobile 
and the occupants thereof.
    (3) Allowances when not justified as advantageous to the Government. 
If the use of more than one privately owned automobile is not justified 
under the circumstances described in this paragraph, only the allowances 
prescribed in paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section shall be 
paid, as if all persons involved traveled in one automobile.

[54 FR 20314, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23657, May 
23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 42, 59 FR 
66626, Dec. 27, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 302-2.4  Advance of funds.

    Advance of funds may be made for per diem and mileage allowances as 
provided in Secs. 302-2.1, 302-2.2(b), and 302-2.3 except in connection 
with employees assigned to posts of duty outside the continental United 
States performing authorized or approved overseas tour renewal agreement 
travel. Such advances may also be made upon return to the place of 
residence for the purpose of separation under the policies and 
procedures prescribed in Sec. 302-1.14(a).

[54 FR 20314, May 10, 1989]


<R03>
PART 302-3--ALLOWANCE FOR MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
302-3.1  Applicability.
302-3.2  Eligibility.
302-3.3  Allowable amount.
302-3.4  Advance of funds.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5738; 20 U.S.C. 905(a); E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13474, 
3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: 54 FR 20316, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 302-3.1  Applicability.

    (a) Purpose for allowance. The miscellaneous expenses allowance 
authorized by Secs. 302-3.2 and 302-3.3 is for defraying various 
contingent costs associated with discontinuing residence at one location 
and establishing residence at a new location in connection with an 
authorized or approved permanent change of station.
    (b) Types of costs covered. The allowance is related to expenses 
that are common to living quarters, furnishings, household appliances, 
and to other general types of costs inherent in relocation of a place of 
residence (see part 302-7 for specific costs normally associated with 
relocation of a mobile home dwelling that are covered under

[[Page 140]]

transportation expenses). The costs intended to be reimbursed under the 
miscellaneous expenses allowance include, but are not limited to the 
following:
    (1) Fees for disconnecting and connecting appliances, equipment, and 
utilities involved in relocation and costs of converting appliances for 
operation on available utilities;
    (2) Fees for cutting and fitting rugs, draperies, and curtains moved 
from one residence quarters to another;
    (3) Utility fees or deposits that are not offset by eventual 
refunds;
    (4) Forfeiture losses on medical, dental, and food locker contracts 
that are not transferable; and contracts for private institutional care, 
such as that provided for handicapped or invalid dependents only, which 
are not transferable or refundable; and
    (5) Costs of automobile registration, driver's license, and use 
taxes imposed when bringing automobiles into certain jurisdictions.
    (c) Types of costs not covered. This allowance shall not be used to 
reimburse the employee for costs or expenses incurred which exceed 
maximums provided by statute or in this subtitle; costs or expenses that 
the employee incurred but which are disallowed elsewhere in this 
subtitle; costs reimbursed under other provisions of law or regulations; 
costs or expenses incurred for reasons of personal taste or preference 
and not required because of the move; losses covered by insurance; fines 
or other penalties imposed upon the employee or members of his/her 
immediate family; judgments, court costs, and similar expenses growing 
out of civil actions; or any other expenses brought about by 
circumstances, factors, or actions in which the move to a new duty 
station was not the proximate cause. Examples of costs which are not 
reimbursable from this allowance are as follows:
    (1) Losses in selling or buying real and personal property and cost 
items related to such transactions;
    (2) Costs which are reimbursed under other provisions of this 
subtitle or under any other regulations or under provisions of any 
statute;
    (3) Cost of additional insurance on household goods while in transit 
to the new official station or cost of loss or damage to such property;
    (4) Additional costs of moving household goods caused by exceeding 
the maximum weight limitation for which the employee has eligibility as 
provided by law or in this chapter;
    (5) Costs of newly acquired items, such as the purchase or 
installation cost of new rugs or draperies;
    (6) Higher income, real estate, sales, or other taxes as the result 
of establishing residence in the new locality;
    (7) Fines imposed for traffic infractions while en route to the new 
official station locality;
    (8) Accident insurance premiums or liability costs incurred in 
connection with travel to the new official station locality, or any 
other liability imposed upon the employee for uninsured damages caused 
by accidents for which he/she or a member of his/her immediate family is 
held responsible;
    (9) Losses as the result of the sale or disposal of items of 
personal property not considered convenient or practicable to move;
    (10) Damage or loss of clothing, luggage, or other personal effects 
while traveling to the new official station locality;
    (11) Subsistence, transportation, or mileage expenses in excess of 
the amounts reimbursed as per diem or other allowances under this 
regulation;
    (12) Medical expenses due to illness or injuries of the employee or 
members of the immediate family while en route to the new official 
station or while living in temporary quarters at Government expense 
under the provisions of part 302-5; or
    (13) Costs incurred in connection with structural alterations; 
remodeling or modernizing of living quarters, garages or other buildings 
to accommodate privately owned automobiles, appliances or equipment; or 
the cost of replacing or repairing worn-out or defective appliances, or 
equipment shipped to the new location.

[54 FR 20316, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 20, 56 FR 46989, 
Sept. 17, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, June 26, 1992]

[[Page 141]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-3.2  Eligibility.

    (a) Coverage. A miscellaneous expense allowance will be payable to 
an employee for whom a permanent change of station is authorized or 
approved and who has discontinued and established a residence in 
connection with such change regardless of where the old or new official 
station is located, provided the applicable eligibility conditions in 
part 302-1 are met and the agreement required in Sec. 302-1.5 is signed.
    (b) Exclusions. The provisions of this part do not apply for new 
appointees, employees assigned under the Government Employees Training 
Act (see 5 U.S.C. 4109), or employees returning from overseas 
assignments for the purpose of separation.

[54 FR 20316, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23657, May 
23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-3.3  Allowable amount.

    Employees eligible for a miscellaneous expense allowance shall be 
paid an amount under paragraph (a) of this section or reimbursed an 
amount under paragraph (b) of this section, but not both, as follows:
    (a) Allowances in the following amounts will be paid without support 
or other documentation of expenses:
    (1) $350 or the equivalent of 1 week's basic pay, whichever is the 
lesser amount, for an employee without immediate family; and
    (2) $700 or the equivalent of 2 weeks' basic pay, whichever is the 
lesser amount, for an employee with immediate family.
    (b) Allowances in excess of those provided in paragraph (a) of this 
section may be authorized or approved, if supported by acceptable 
statements of fact and either paid bills or other acceptable evidence 
justifying the amounts claimed, provided the aggregate amount does not 
exceed the employee's basic pay (at the time the employee reported for 
duty) for 1 week if the employee is without an immediate family, or for 
2 weeks if the employee has an immediate family. In no instance will the 
amount exceed the maximum rate of grade GS-13 provided in 5 U.S.C. 5332 
at the time the employee reported for duty. The entire amount claimed 
under this paragraph (including the amount otherwise payable without 
such documentation under paragraph (a) of this section) must be 
supported as required in this paragraph.

[54 FR 20316, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-3.4  Advance of funds.

    No advance of funds is authorized in connection with the allowance 
provided in this part.

[54 FR 20316, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, 
June 26, 1992]


<R03>
PART 302-4--ALLOWANCE FOR HOUSEHUNTING TRIP EXPENSES--Table of Contents

<R05>


     Subpart A--Employee's Allowance For Househunting Trip Expenses

Sec.
302-4.1  What is a ``househunting trip''?
302-4.2  What is the purpose of the househunting trip expenses 
          allowance?
302-4.3  Am I eligible for a househunting trip expenses allowance?
302-4.4  Who is not eligible for a househunting trip expenses allowance?
302-4.5  Must my agency authorize payment of a househunting trip 
          expenses allowance?
302-4.6  Under what circumstances will I receive a househunting trip 
          expenses allowance?
302-4.7  Who may travel on a househunting trip at Government expense?
302-4.8  How many househunting trips may my agency authorize in 
          connection with a particular transfer?
302-4.9  May my spouse and I perform separate househunting trips at 
          Government expense?
302-4.10  How soon may I and/or my spouse begin a househunting trip?
302-4.11  Is there a time limit on the duration of a househunting trip?
302-4.12  When must my househunting trip be completed?
302-4.13  What methods may my agency use to reimburse me for 
          househunting trip expenses?
302-4.14  What transportation expenses will my agency pay?
302-4.15  Must I document my househunting trip expenses to receive 
          reimbursement?
302-4.16  May I receive an advance of funds for househunting trip 
          expenses?
302-4.17  Am I in a duty status when I perform a househunting trip?

[[Page 142]]

                   SUBPART B--AGENCY RESPONSIBILITIES

302-4.100  How should we administer the househunting trip expenses 
          allowance?
302-4.101  What governing policies must we establish for the 
          househunting trip expenses allowance?
302-4.102  Under what circumstances may we authorize a househunting 
          trip?
302-4.103  What factors must we consider in determining whether to offer 
          an employee the fixed amount househunting trip subsistence 
          expenses reimbursement option?

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5738; 20 U.S.C. 905(a); E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13474, 
3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: FTR Amdt. 63, 62 FR 13768, Mar. 21, 1997, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
     SUBPART A--EMPLOYEE'S ALLOWANCE FOR HOUSEHUNTING TRIP EXPENSES

    Note to subpart A: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.1  What is a ``househunting trip''?

    The term ``househunting trip'' refers to a trip made by the employee 
and/or spouse to the new official station locality to find permanent 
living quarters to rent or purchase. The term ``living quarters'' in 
this part includes apartments, condominiums, and cooperatives in 
addition to townhomes and single family homes.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.2  What is the purpose of the househunting trip expenses allowance?

    The allowance for househunting trip expenses is intended to 
facilitate and expedite the employee's move from the old official 
station to the new official station and to lower the Government's 
overall cost for the employee's relocation by reducing the amount of 
time an employee must occupy temporary quarters. The allowance for 
househunting trip expenses provides the employee and/or spouse a period 
of time to concentrate on finding a suitable permanent residence at the 
new official station and thereby expedites the employee's relocation.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.3  Am I eligible for a househunting trip expenses allowance?

    You are eligible for a househunting trip expenses allowance if you 
are an employee who is authorized to transfer, and in addition:
    (a) Both your old and new official stations are located within the 
United States;
    (b) You are not assigned to Government or other prearranged housing 
at the new official station; and
    (c) Your old and new official stations are 75 or more miles apart 
(as measured by map distance) via a usually traveled surface route.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.4  Who is not eligible for a househunting trip expenses allowance?

    New appointees and employees assigned under the Government Employees 
Training Act (5 U.S.C. 4109) are not eligible for a househunting trip 
expenses allowance.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.5  Must my agency authorize payment of a househunting trip expenses allowance?

    No. Your agency determines when it is in the Government's interest 
to authorize you a househunting trip and the procedures you must follow 
if it is authorized.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.6  Under what circumstances will I receive a househunting trip expenses allowance?

    You will receive a househunting trip expenses allowance if:
    (a) Your agency authorized you to perform a househunting trip in 
advance of the travel (the agency authorization must specify the mode of 
transportation and the period of time allowed for the trip);
    (b) You have signed a service agreement;
    (c) Your agency has established, and informed you of, the date you 
are to report to your new official station; and
    (d) You meet any additional conditions your agency has established.

[[Page 143]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.7  Who may travel on a househunting trip at Government expense?

    Only you and/or your spouse may travel on a househunting trip at 
Government expense.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.8  How many househunting trips may my agency authorize in connection with a particular transfer?

    Your agency may authorize only one round trip for you and/or your 
spouse in connection with a particular transfer.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.9  May my spouse and I perform separate househunting trips at Government expense?

    Yes. However, your reimbursement will be limited to the cost that 
would have been incurred if you and your spouse had traveled together on 
one round trip.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.10  How soon may I and/or my spouse begin a househunting trip?

    You may begin your househunting trip as soon as your agency has 
notified you of your transfer and issued a travel authorization for a 
househunting trip. To take maximum advantage of your trip, however, it 
is very important that you become familiar as quickly as you can with 
your new official station area (e.g., housing market conditions, school 
locations, etc.). If you are selling your residence at your old official 
station, you should not begin your househunting trip until you have a 
current appraisal of the value of the residence so that you can more 
accurately determine the appropriate price range of residences to 
consider during your househunting trip.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.11  Is there a time limit on the duration of a househunting trip?

    A househunting trip should be for a reasonable period, not to exceed 
10 calendar days, as authorized by your agency under Sec. 302-4.101(d).


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.12  When must my househunting trip be completed?

    You and/or your spouse must complete your househunting trip as 
indicated in the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       Your househunting trip must be   
                For                             completed by            
------------------------------------------------------------------------
You...............................  The day before you report to your   
                                     new official station.              
Your spouse.......................  The earlier of:                     
                                       (a) the day before your family   
                                        relocates to your new official  
                                        station; or                     
                                       (b) The day before the maximum   
                                        time for beginning allowable    
                                        travel expires (see Sec.  302-  
                                        1.6 of this chapter).           
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sec. 302-4.13    What methods may my agency use to reimburse me for 
        househunting trip expenses?

    Your agency will reimburse your househunting trip expenses as 
indicated in the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                For                          You are reimbursed         
------------------------------------------------------------------------
You and/or your spouse's            Your actual transportation costs.   
 transportation expenses.                                               
You and/or your spouse's            One of the following:               
 subsistence expenses.                                                  
                                       (a) A per diem allowance for you 
                                        and/or your spouse as prescribed
                                        under part 302-2 of this        
                                        chapter; or                     
                                       (b) If you accept your agency's  
                                        offer of the fixed amount       
                                        option, and:                    
                                        (1) Both you and your spouse    
                                         perform a househunting trip    
                                         either together or separately, 
                                         a single amount determined by  
                                         multiplying the applicable     
                                         locality rate (listed in       
                                         appendix A to chapter 301 of   
                                         this subtitle) by 6.25, or     
                                        (2) Only one of you performs a  
                                         househunting trip, an amount   
                                         determined by multiplying the  
                                         applicable locality rate       
                                         (listed in appendix A to       
                                         chapter 301 of this subtitle)  
                                         by 5.                          
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 144]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.14  What transportation expenses will my agency pay?

    Your agency will authorize you to travel by the transportation 
mode(s) (e.g., airline, train, or privately owned automobile) it 
determines to be advantageous to the Government. Your agency will pay 
for your transportation expenses by the authorized mode(s). If you 
travel by any other mode(s), your agency will pay your transportation 
expenses not to exceed the cost of transportation by the authorized 
mode(s).


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.15  Must I document my househunting trip expenses to receive reimbursement?

    To receive reimbursement for househunting trip transportation 
expenses you must itemize your transportation expenses and provide 
receipts as required by Sec. 301-11.3(c) of this subtitle. For fixed 
amount househunting trip subsistence reimbursement, you do not document 
your subsistence expenses. For per diem househunting trip subsistence 
expense reimbursement, you must itemize your lodging expenses and you 
must provide receipts as required by Sec. 301-7.9(b) and Sec. 301-
11.3(c) of this subtitle.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.16  May I receive an advance of funds for househunting trip expenses?

    Your agency may authorize an advance of funds, in accordance with 
Sec. 302-1.14(a) of this chapter, for your househunting trip expenses. 
Your agency may not advance you funds in excess of the sum of your 
anticipated transportation costs and either the maximum per diem 
allowable under part 302-2 of this chapter for the location and duration 
of your househunting trip or your fixed amount househunting trip 
subsistence expenses payment, whichever applies.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.17  Am I in a duty status when I perform a househunting trip?

    Yes.


<R04>
                   Subpart B--Agency Responsibilities

    Note to Subpart B: Use of the pronouns ``we'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.100  How should we administer the househunting trip expenses allowance?

    You should administer the househunting trip expenses allowance to 
minimize or avoid its use when other satisfactory and more economical 
arrangements are available.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.101  What governing policies must we establish for the househunting trip expenses allowance?

    You must establish policies and procedures governing:
    (a) When you will authorize a househunting trip for an employee;
    (b) Who will determine if a househunting trip is appropriate in each 
situation;
    (c) If and when you will authorize the fixed amount option for 
househunting trip subsistence expenses reimbursement;
    (d) Who will determine the appropriate duration of a househunting 
trip for an employee who selects a per diem allowance under part 302-2 
of this chapter to reimburse househunting trip subsistence expenses; and
    (e) Who will determine the mode(s) of transportation to be used.


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.102  Under what circumstances may we authorize a househunting trip?

    You may authorize a househunting trip on an individual-case basis 
when the employee has accepted the transfer and his/her circumstances 
indicate that a househunting trip actually is needed. You may not 
authorize a househunting trip when the purpose of the trip is to assist 
the employee in deciding whether he or she will accept the transfer.

[[Page 145]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-4.103   What factors must we consider in determining whether to offer an employee the fixed amount househunting trip subsistence expenses reimbursement 
          option?

    You must consider the following factors:
    (a) Ease of administration. Payment of a per diem allowance under 
part 302-2 of this chapter requires you to review claims for the 
validity, accuracy, and reasonableness of each expense amount, except 
for meals and incidental expenses. Fixed amount househunting trip 
subsistence expenses reimbursement is easier to administer because you 
do not have to review expense amounts.
    (b) Cost considerations. You must weigh the cost of each 
reimbursement option on a case-by-case basis.
    (c) Treatment of employees. The employee is allowed to choose 
between a per diem allowance under part 302-2 of this chapter and fixed 
amount househunting trip subsistence expenses reimbursement when you 
offer the fixed amount reimbursement method. You therefore should weigh 
employee morale and productivity considerations against actual cost 
considerations in determining which method to offer.


<R03>
PART 302-5--ALLOWANCE FOR TEMPORARY QUARTERS SUBSISTENCE EXPENSES--Table of Contents

<R05>


                        Subpart A--General Rules

Sec.
302-5.1  What are ``temporary quarters''?
302-5.2   What are ``temporary quarters subsistence expenses (TQSE)''?
302-5.3  What is the purpose of the TQSE allowance?
302-5.4  Am I eligible for a TQSE allowance?
302-5.5  Who is not eligible for a TQSE allowance?
302-5.6  Must my agency authorize payment of a TQSE allowance?
302-5.7  Under what circumstances will I receive a TQSE allowance?
302-5.8  Who may occupy temporary quarters at Government expense?
302-5.9  Where may I/we occupy temporary quarters at Government expense?
302-5.10  May my immediate family and I occupy temporary quarters at 
          different locations?
302-5.11  What methods may my agency use to reimburse me for TQSE?
302-5.12  Must I document my TQSE to receive reimbursement?
302-5.13  How soon may I/we begin occupying temporary quarters at 
          Government expense?
302-5.14  How is my TQSE allowance affected if my temporary quarters 
          become my permanent residence quarters?
302-5.15  May I receive an advance of funds for TQSE?
302-5.16  May I receive a TQSE allowance if I am receiving another 
          subsistence expenses allowance?
302-5.17  Am I eligible for a TQSE allowance if I transfer to a foreign 
          area?
302-5.18  May I be reimbursed for local transportation expenses incurred 
          while I am occupying temporary quarters?

             Subpart B--Actual TQSE Method of Reimbursement

302-5.100  What am I paid under the actual TQSE reimbursement method?
302-5.101  May my agency reduce my TQSE allowance below the ``maximum 
          allowable amount''?
302-5.102  What is the ``applicable per diem rate'' under the actual 
          TQSE reimbursement method?
302-5.103  What is the latest the period for which I claim actual TQSE 
          reimbursement may begin?
302-5.104  How long may I be authorized to claim actual TQSE 
          reimbursement?
302-5.105  What is a ``compelling reason'' warranting extension of my 
          authorized period for claiming actual TQSE reimbursement?
302-5.106  May I interrupt occupancy of temporary quarters?
302-5.107  What effect do partial days of temporary quarters occupancy 
          have on my authorized period for claiming actual TQSE 
          reimbursement?
302-5.108  When does my authorized period for claiming actual TQSE 
          reimbursement end?
302-5.109  May the period for which I am authorized to claim actual TQSE 
          reimbursement for myself be different from that of my 
          immediate family?
302-5.110  What effect do partial days have on my actual TQSE 
          reimbursement?
302-5.111  May I and/or my immediate family occupy temporary quarters 
          longer than the period for which I am authorized to claim 
          actual TQSE reimbursement?

                  Subpart C--Fixed Amount Reimbursement

302-5.200  What am I paid under the fixed amount reimbursement method?
302-5.201  How do I determine the amount of my payment under the fixed 
          amount reimbursement method?

[[Page 146]]

302-5.202  Will I receive additional TQSE reimbursement if my fixed 
          amount is not adequate to cover my TQSE?

                   Subpart D--Agency Responsibilities

302-5.300  How should we administer the TQSE allowance?
302-5.301  What governing policies must we establish for the TQSE 
          allowance?
302-5.302  Under what circumstances may we authorize the TQSE allowance?
302-5.303  What factors should we consider in determining whether the 
          TQSE allowance actually is necessary?
302-5.304  What factors should we consider in determining whether to 
          offer an employee the fixed amount TQSE reimbursement option?
302-5.305  What factors should we consider in determining whether 
          quarters are temporary?

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5738; 20 U.S.C. 905(a); E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13474, 
3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: FTR Amdt. 59, 62 FR 13756, Mar. 21, 1997, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
                        Subpart A--General Rules

    Note to subpart A: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.1  What are ``temporary quarters''?

    The term ``temporary quarters'' refers to lodging obtained for the 
purpose of temporary occupancy from a private or commercial source.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.2  What are ``temporary quarters subsistence expenses (TQSE)''?

    ``Temporary quarters subsistence expenses'' or ``TQSE'' are 
subsistence expenses incurred by an employee and/or his/her immediate 
family while occupying temporary quarters. TQSE does not include local 
transportation expenses incurred during occupancy of temporary quarters 
(see Sec. 302-5.18 for details).


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.3  What is the purpose of the TQSE allowance?

    The TQSE allowance is intended to reimburse an employee reasonably 
and equitably for subsistence expenses incurred when it is necessary to 
occupy temporary quarters.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.4  Am I eligible for a TQSE allowance?

    You are eligible for a TQSE allowance if you are an employee who is 
authorized to transfer; and
    (a) Your new official station is located within the United States, 
its territories or possessions, the Commonwealths of Puerto Rico or the 
Northern Mariana Islands, or the former Canal Zone area (i.e., areas and 
installations in the Republic of Panama made available to the United 
States pursuant to the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 and related 
agreements (as described in 22 U.S.C. 3602(a))); and
    (b) Your old and new official stations are 40 miles or more apart 
(as measured by map distance) via a usually traveled surface route.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.5  Who is not eligible for a TQSE allowance?

    New appointees, employees assigned under the Government Employees 
Training Act (5 U.S.C. 4109), and employees returning from an overseas 
assignment for the purpose of separation are not eligible for a TQSE 
allowance.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.6  Must my agency authorize payment of a TQSE allowance?

    No, your agency determines whether it is in the Government's 
interest to pay TQSE.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.7  Under what circumstances will I receive a TQSE allowance?

    You will receive a TQSE allowance if:
    (a) Your agency authorizes it before you occupy the temporary 
quarters (the agency authorization must specify the period of time 
allowed for you to occupy temporary quarters); and
    (b) You have signed a service agreement; and
    (c) You meet any additional conditions your agency has established.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.8  Who may occupy temporary quarters at Government expense?

    Only you and/or your immediate family may occupy temporary quarters 
at Government expense.

[[Page 147]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.9  Where may I/we occupy temporary quarters at Government expense?

    You and/or your immediate family may occupy temporary quarters at 
Government expense within reasonable proximity of your old and/or new 
official stations. Neither you nor your immediate family may be 
reimbursed for occupying temporary quarters at any other location, 
unless justified by special circumstances that are reasonably related to 
your transfer.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.10  May my immediate family and I occupy temporary quarters at different locations?

    Yes. For example, if you must vacate your home at the old official 
station and report to the new official station and your family remains 
behind until the end of the school year, you may need to occupy 
temporary quarters at the new official station while your family 
occupies temporary quarters at the old official station.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.11  What methods may my agency use to reimburse me for TQSE?

    Your agency will reimburse you for TQSE under the actual expense 
method unless it permits the ``fixed amount'' reimbursement method as an 
alternative. If your agency makes both methods available to you, you may 
select the one you prefer.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.12  Must I document my TQSE to receive reimbursement?

    For fixed amount TQSE reimbursement, you do not document your TQSE. 
For actual TQSE reimbursement, you must document your TQSE by itemizing 
each expense and providing receipts as required by FTR Sec. 301-11.3(c) 
of this subtitle.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.13  How soon may I/we begin occupying temporary quarters at Government expense?

    As soon as your agency has authorized you to receive a TQSE 
allowance and you have signed a service agreement.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.14  How is my TQSE allowance affected if my temporary quarters become my permanent residence quarters?

    If your temporary quarters become your permanent residence quarters, 
you may receive a TQSE allowance only if you show in a manner 
satisfactory to your agency that you initially intended to occupy the 
quarters temporarily.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.15  May I receive an advance of funds for TQSE?

    Yes. If authorized in accordance with Sec. 302-1.14(a) of this 
chapter, your agency may advance the amount of funds necessary to cover 
your estimated TQSE expenses for up to 30 days. Your agency subsequently 
may advance additional funds for periods up to 30 days.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.16  May I receive a TQSE allowance if I am receiving another subsistence expenses allowance?

    No, with one exception. You may receive a cost-of-living allowance 
payable under 5 U.S.C. 5941 in addition to a TQSE allowance.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.17  Am I eligible for a TQSE allowance if I transfer to a foreign area?

    No. You may not receive a TQSE allowance under this part when you 
transfer to an area outside the United States, its territories or 
possessions, the Commonwealths of Puerto Rico or the Northern Mariana 
Islands, or the former Canal Zone area (i.e., areas and installations in 
the Republic of Panama made available to the United States pursuant to 
the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 and related agreements (as described in 
22 U.S.C. 3602(a))). However, you may qualify for a comparable allowance 
under the Standardized Regulations (Government Civilians, Foreign Areas) 
prescribed by the State Department.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.18  May I be reimbursed for local transportation expenses incurred while I am occupying temporary quarters?

    Generally not. Local transportation expenses are not TQSE, and there 
is no

[[Page 148]]

authority to pay them as such. You may, however, be reimbursed under 
part 301-2 of this subtitle for necessary transportation expenses if you 
perform local official business travel while you are occupying temporary 
quarters.


<R04>
             Subpart B--Actual TQSE Method of Reimbursement

    Note to subpart B: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.100  What am I paid under the actual TQSE reimbursement method?

    Your agency will pay your actual TQSE incurred, provided the 
expenses are reasonable and do not exceed the maximum allowable amount. 
The ``maximum allowable amount'' is the ``maximum daily amount'' 
multiplied by the number of days you actually incur TQSE not to exceed 
the number of days authorized, taking into account that the rates change 
after 30 days in temporary quarters. The ``maximum daily amount'' is 
determined by adding the rates in the following table for you and each 
member of your immediate family authorized to occupy temporary quarters:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       The ``maximum daily amount'' of TQSE under the actual expense method that
                                      --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Your accompanied spouse                         
                 For                       You and/or your        or a member of your        A member of your   
                                        unaccompanied spouse*   immediate family who is  immediate family who is
                                            may receive is        age 12 or older may        under age 12 may   
                                                                       receive is               receive is      
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The first 30 days of temporary         The applicable per diem  .75 times the            .5 times the applicable
 quarters.                              rate.                    applicable per diem      per diem rate.        
                                                                 rate.                                          
Any additional days of temporary       .75 times the            .5 times the applicable  .4 times the applicable
 quarters.                              applicable per diem      per diem rate.           per diem rate.        
                                        rate.                                                                   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(That is, when the spouse necessarily occupies temporary quarters in lieu of the employee or in a location      
  separate from the employee.)                                                                                  


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.101  May my agency reduce my TQSE allowance below the ``maximum allowable amount''?

    Yes. If the estimated daily amount of your TQSE is determined in 
advance to be lower than the maximum daily amount, your agency may 
reduce the maximum allowable amount to your expected expenses.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.102  What is the ``applicable per diem rate'' under the actual TQSE reimbursement method?

    The ``applicable per diem rate'' under the actual TQSE reimbursement 
method is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               The applicable per diem  
     For temporary quarters located in                 rate is          
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The continental United States (CONUS)......  The standard CONUS rate.   
Alaska, Hawaii, the United States            The locality rate          
 territories or possessions, the              established by the        
 Commonwealths of Puerto Rico or the          Secretary of Defense or   
 Northern Mariana Islands, or the former      the Secretary of State    
 Canal Zone area (i.e., areas and             under Sec.  301-7.3 of    
 installations in the Republic of Panama      this subtitle.            
 made available to the United States                                    
 pursuant to the Panama Canal Treaty of                                 
 1977 and related agreements (as described                              
 in section 3(a) of the Panama Canal Act of                             
 1979)).                                                                
------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.103  What is the latest the period for which I claim actual TQSE reimbursement may begin?

    The period must begin before the maximum time for beginning 
allowable travel and transportation under Sec. 302-1.6 of this chapter 
expires.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.104  How long may I be authorized to claim actual TQSE reimbursement?

    Your agency may authorize you to claim actual TQSE in 30-day 
increments, not to exceed 60 consecutive days. However, if your agency 
determines that there is a compelling reason

[[Page 149]]

for you to continue occupying temporary quarters after 60 consecutive 
days, it may authorize an extension of up to 60 additional consecutive 
days. Under no circumstances may you be authorized to claim actual TQSE 
reimbursement for more than a total of 120 consecutive days.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.105  What is a ``compelling reason'' warranting extension of my authorized period for claiming actual TQSE reimbursement?

    A ``compelling reason'' is an event that is beyond your control and 
is acceptable to your agency. Examples include, but are not limited to:
    (a) Delivery of your household goods to your new residence is 
delayed due to strikes, customs clearance, hazardous weather, fires, 
floods or other acts of God, or similar events.
    (b) You cannot occupy your new permanent residence because of 
unanticipated problems (e.g., delay in settlement on the new residence, 
or short-term delay in construction of the residence).
    (c) You are unable to locate a permanent residence which is adequate 
for your family's needs because of housing conditions at your new 
official station.
    (d) Sudden illness, injury, or death of employee or immediate family 
member.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.106  May I interrupt occupancy of temporary quarters?

    Yes. Your authorized period for claiming actual TQSE reimbursement 
is measured in consecutive days, and once begun, normally continues to 
run whether or not you occupy temporary quarters. You may, however, 
interrupt your authorized period for claiming actual TQSE reimbursement 
in the following instances:
    (a) For the time allowed for en route travel between the old and new 
official stations;
    (b) For circumstances attributable to official necessity such as an 
intervening temporary duty assignment or military duty; or
    (c) For a non-official necessary interruption such as 
hospitalization, approved sick leave, or other reason beyond your 
control and acceptable to your agency.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.107  What effect do partial days of temporary quarters occupancy have on my authorized period for claiming actual TQSE reimbursement?

    Occupancy of temporary quarters for less than a whole day 
constitutes one full day of your authorized period. (However, see 
Sec. 302-5.110 regarding en route travel.)


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.108  When does my authorized period for claiming actual TQSE reimbursement end?

    The period ends at midnight on the earlier of:
    (a) The day preceding the day you and/or any member of your 
immediate family occupies permanent residence quarters.
    (b) The day your authorized period for claiming actual TQSE 
reimbursement expires.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.109  May the period for which I am authorized to claim actual TQSE reimbursement for myself be different from that of my immediate family?

    No, the eligibility period for which you are authorized to claim 
actual TQSE reimbursement for yourself and for each member of your 
immediate family must run concurrently.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.110  What effect do partial days have on my actual TQSE reimbursement?

    You may not receive reimbursement under both the actual TQSE 
allowance and another subsistence expenses allowance within the same 
calendar day, with one exception: if you claim TQSE reimbursement on the 
same day that en route travel per diem ends, your en route travel per 
diem will be computed under applicable partial day rules and you also 
may be reimbursed for actual TQSE you incur after 6:00 p.m. of that day.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.111  May I and/or my immediate family occupy temporary quarters longer than the period for which I am authorized to claim actual TQSE reimbursement?

    Yes, but you will not be reimbursed for any of the expenses you 
incur during the unauthorized period.

[[Page 150]]


<R04>
                  Subpart C--Fixed Amount Reimbursement

    Note to subpart C: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.200  What am I paid under the fixed amount reimbursement method?

    If your agency offers and you select the fixed amount TQSE 
reimbursement method, you are paid a fixed amount for up to 30 days. No 
extensions are allowed under the fixed amount method.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.201  How do I determine the amount of my payment under the fixed amount reimbursement method?

    Multiply the number of days your agency authorizes TQSE by .75 times 
the maximum per diem rate (i.e., lodging plus meals and incidental 
expenses) prescribed in chapter 301 of this subtitle for the locality of 
the new official duty station. Then, for each member of your immediate 
family, multiply the same number of days by .25 times the same per diem 
rate. Your payment will be the sum of these calculations.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.202  Will I receive additional TQSE reimbursement if my fixed amount is not adequate to cover my TQSE?

    No.


<R04>
                   Subpart D--Agency Responsibilities

    Note to subpart D: Use of the pronouns ``we'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.300  How should we administer the TQSE allowance?

    Temporary quarters should be used only if, and only for as long as, 
necessary until the employee and/or his/her immediate family can move 
into permanent residence quarters. You must administer the TQSE 
allowance to minimize or avoid other relocation expenses.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.301  What governing policies must we establish for the TQSE allowance?

    You must establish policies and procedures governing:
    (a) When you will authorize temporary quarters for employees;
    (b) Who will determine if temporary quarters is appropriate in each 
situation;
    (c) If and when you will authorize the fixed amount option for TQSE 
reimbursement;
    (d) Who will determine the appropriate period of time for which TQSE 
reimbursement will be authorized, including approval of extensions and 
interruptions of temporary quarters occupancy;
    (e) Who will determine whether quarters were indeed temporary, if 
there is any doubt.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.302  Under what circumstances may we authorize the TQSE allowance?

    You may authorize a TQSE allowance on an individual-case basis when 
use of temporary quarters is justified in connection with an employee's 
transfer to a new official station. You may not authorize a TQSE 
allowance for vacation purposes or other reasons unrelated to the 
transfer.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.303  What factors should we consider in determining whether the TQSE allowance actually is necessary?

    The factors you should consider include:
    (a) The length of time the employee should reasonably be expected to 
occupy his/her residence at the old official station prior to reporting 
for duty at the new official station. An employee and his/her immediate 
family should continue to occupy the residence at the old official 
station for as long as practicable to avoid the necessity for temporary 
quarters.
    (b) The existence of less expensive alternatives. If a less 
expensive alternative to the TQSE allowance exists that will enable the 
employee to find permanent quarters at the new official station, you 
should consider such an alternative. For example, authorize a

[[Page 151]]

househunting trip instead of temporary quarters if it would cost less 
overall.
    (c) The existence of other opportunities to arrange for permanent 
quarters. Consider whether the employee had other adequate opportunity 
to arrange for permanent quarters. For example, you should not authorize 
temporary quarters if the employee had adequate opportunity during an 
extended temporary duty assignment to arrange for permanent quarters.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.304  What factors should we consider in determining whether to offer an employee the fixed amount TQSE reimbursement option?

    The factors you should consider include:
    (a) Ease of administration. Actual TQSE reimbursement requires an 
agency to review claims for the validity, accuracy, and reasonableness 
of each expense amount. Fixed amount TQSE reimbursement does not require 
review of expense amounts and is therefore easier to administer.
    (b) Cost considerations. You must weigh the cost of each 
alternative. Actual TQSE reimbursement may extend up to 120 consecutive 
days, while fixed amount TQSE reimbursement is limited to 30 days. 
Actual TQSE reimbursement may be less expensive, since its ceiling is 
based on the standard CONUS rate, while fixed amount TQSE reimbursement 
is based on the locality per diem rate. However, fixed amount TQSE 
reimbursement may be less expensive because the maximum daily rate under 
actual TQSE reimbursement is a higher percentage of the applicable per 
diem rate than fixed amount TQSE reimbursement.
    (c) Treatment of employee. The employee is allowed to choose between 
actual TQSE reimbursement and fixed amount TQSE reimbursement when you 
offer the fixed amount TQSE reimbursement method. You therefore should 
weigh employee morale and productivity considerations against actual 
cost considerations in determining which method to offer.


<R05>
Sec. 302-5.305  What factors should we consider in determining whether quarters are temporary?

    In determining whether quarters are ``temporary'', you should 
consider factors such as the duration of the lease, movement of 
household effects into the quarters, the type of quarters, the 
employee's expressions of intent, attempts to secure a permanent 
dwelling, and the length of time the employee occupies the quarters.


<R03>
PART 302-6--ALLOWANCE FOR EXPENSES INCURRED IN CONNECTION WITH RESIDENCE TRANSACTIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
302-6.1  Conditions and requirements under which allowances are payable.
302-6.2  Reimbursable and nonreimbursable expenses.
302-6.3  Procedural and control requirements.
302-6.4  Exclusions.
302-6.5  Advance of funds.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5738 and 20 U.S.C. 905(c).

    Source: 54 FR 20321, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 302-6.1  Conditions and requirements under which allowances are payable.

    To the extent allowable under this part, the Government shall 
reimburse an employee for expenses required to be paid by him/her in 
connection with the sale of one residence at his/her old official 
station, for purchase (including construction) of one dwelling at his/
her new official station, or for the settlement of an unexpired lease 
involving his/her residence or a lot on which a mobile home used as his/
her residence was located at the old official station provided the 
conditions set forth in this section are met:
    (a) Transfers covered--agreement required. A permanent change of 
station is authorized or approved and, except as provided in paragraph 
(g) of this section, the old and new official stations are located 
within the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, a 
United States territory or possession, or the former Canal Zone area 
(i.e., areas and installations in the Republic of Panama made available 
to the United States under the Panama

[[Page 152]]

Canal Treaty of 1977 and related agreements (as described in section 
3(a) of the Panama Canal Act of 1979)), and the employee has signed an 
agreement as required in Sec. 302-1.5. (See exclusions in Sec. 302-6.4.)
    (b) Location and type of residence. The residence or dwelling is the 
residence as described in Sec. 302-1.4(k), which may be a mobile home 
and/or the lot on which such mobile home is located or will be located. 
These criteria also apply to the former nonforeign area official station 
residence of employees who are eligible for residence transaction 
expenses under paragraph (g) of this section (see definition in 
paragraph (g)(1)(i) of this section).
    (c) Title requirements. The title to the residence or dwelling at 
the old or new official station, or the interest in a cooperatively 
owned dwelling or in an unexpired lease, is in the name of the employee 
alone, or in the joint names of the employee and one or more members of 
his/her immediate family, or solely in the name of one or more members 
of his/her immediate family. The rules in paragraphs (c) (1) through (3) 
of this section apply in determining title to the residence.
    (1) Title interest must have been acquired prior to notification of 
transfer. For an employee to be eligible for reimbursement of the costs 
of selling a dwelling or terminating a lease at the old official 
station, the employee's property interest must have been acquired prior 
to the date the employee was first officially notified of his/her 
transfer to the new official station. In the case of an employee covered 
by paragraph (g) of this section, the employee's interest must have been 
acquired prior to the date the employee was first officially notified of 
his/her transfer to the foreign area.
    (2) Legal title interest. Except as provided in paragraph (c)(3) of 
this section, title to the residence is determined by the name of the 
party (or parties) on the title document (e.g., the deed).
    (3) Equitable title interest. The employee, and/or a member(s) of 
his/her immediate family, in a situation listed in paragraphs (c)(3) (i) 
through (v) of this section is deemed to have title to the residence 
without regard to whether his/her name appears on the title document.

    (i) Title held in trust. The property is held in trust and the 
conditions in paragraphs (c)(3)(i) (A) through (F) of this section 
apply.

    (A) The property must be the employee's residence as described in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (B) The employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate family must be 
the only beneficiary(ies) of the trust during his/her lifetime.
    (C) The employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate family must 
retain the right to distribute the property during his/her lifetime.
    (D) The employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate family must 
retain the right to manage the property.
    (E) The employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate family must be 
the only grantor/settlor of the trust, or must retain the right to 
direct distribution of the property upon dissolution of the trust or 
death.
    (F) The employee provides the agency with a copy of the trust 
document.

    (ii) Title held by financial institution. The title is held in the 
name of a financial institution and the conditions in paragraphs 
(c)(3)(ii) (A) through (D) of this section apply.
    (A) The property is the employee's residence as described in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (B) The employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate family executed 
a financing agreement (e.g., mortgage) with the financial institution.
    (C) State or local law requires that lending parties take title to 
perfect (i.e., protect) a security interest in the property, or the 
financial institution requires that it take possession of title as a 
condition of the financing agreement.
    (D) The employee must provide the agency with a copy of the 
financing document. The agency may require that the employee also 
provide proof of state or local laws governing secured credit.

    (iii) Title includes an accommodation party or parties. The title is 
held both in the names of: the employee singularly,

[[Page 153]]

or the employee and one or more members of his/her immediate family 
jointly, or one or more members of his/her immediate family; and an 
individual (accommodation party) who is not an immediate family member. 
In addition, the conditions in paragraphs (c)(3)(iii) (A) through (G) of 
this section apply. (An accommodation party is an individual who signs 
an employee's financing agreement (e.g., a mortgage) to lend his/her 
name (i.e., credit) to the arrangement.)
    (A) The property is the employee's residence as described in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (B) The employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate family has 
right to use the property and to direct conveyance of the property.
    (C) The lender requires signature of the accommodation party on the 
financing document.
    (D) The employee and/or a member of the immediate family, is liable 
for payments under the financing arrangement (e.g., mortgage).
    (E) The accommodation party's name is on the title.
    (F) The accommodation party does not have a financial interest in 
the property unless the employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate 
family defaults on the financing arrangement.
    (G) The employee provides the agency with acceptable documentation 
of the accommodation. Agencies shall issue policy defining acceptable 
documentation of the accommodation. Such documentation may include a 
copy of the financing document and/or a written statement from the 
employee certifying that the conditions in paragraphs (c)(3)(iii) (A) 
through (G) of this section apply. Such documentation also may include a 
written statement from the accommodation party certifying that he/she 
does not have a financial interest in the property.

    (iv) Title held by seller of the property. The title is held in the 
name of the seller of the property and the conditions in paragraphs 
(c)(3)(iv) (A) through (D) of this section apply.
    (A) The property is the employee's residence as described in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (B) The employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate family has 
right to use the property and to direct conveyance of the property.
    (C) The employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate family must 
have signed a financing agreement with the seller of the property (e.g., 
a land contract) providing for fixed periodic payments and transfer of 
title to the employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate family upon 
completion of the payment schedule.
    (D) The employee must provide the agency with a copy of the 
financing agreement.

    (v) Other equitable title situations. The title is held both in the 
names of: the employee singularly, or the employee and one or more 
members of his/her immediate family jointly, or one or more members of 
his/her immediate family; and an individual who is not an immediate 
family member. In addition, the conditions in paragraphs (c)(3)(v) (A) 
through (E) of this section apply.
    (A) The property is the employee's residence as described in 
paragraph (b) of this section.
    (B) The employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate family has 
right to use the property and to direct conveyance of the property.
    (C) Only the employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate family has 
made payments on the property.
    (D) The employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate family received 
all proceeds from the sale of the property.
    (E) The employee must provide suitable documentation to the agency 
that the conditions listed in paragraphs (c)(3)(v) (A) through (D) of 
this section have been met. Agencies shall issue policy defining 
acceptable documentation. Such documentation must include financial 
documents proving that only the employee and/or a member(s) of the 
immediate family made payments on the property, and financial documents 
proving that the employee and/or a member(s) of the immediate family 
received all proceeds from the sale of the property.

    (d) Occupancy requirements. The dwelling for which reimbursement of 
selling expenses is claimed was, except as provided in paragraph (g) of 
this section, the employee's residence at the time he/she was first 
officially notified

[[Page 154]]

by competent authority of his/her transfer to the new official station.
    (e) Time limitation--(1) Initial period. The settlement dates for 
the sale and purchase or lease termination transactions for which 
reimbursement is requested are not later than 2 years after the date 
that the employee reported for duty at the new official station. For 
employees eligible under paragraph (g) of this section, new official 
station means the official station to which the employee reports for 
duty when reassigned or transferred from a foreign area.
    (2) Extension of time limitation. (i) Upon an employee's written 
request, the 2-year time limitation for completion of the sale and 
purchase or lease termination transactions may be extended by the head 
of the agency or his/her designee for an additional period of time not 
to exceed 1 year.
    (ii) The employee's written request should be submitted to the 
appropriate agency official(s) as soon as the employee becomes aware of 
the need for an extension but before expiration of the 2-year 
limitation; however, in no case shall the request be submitted later 
than 30 calendar days after the expiration date unless this 30-day 
period is specifically extended by the agency.
    (iii) Approval of this additional period of time shall be based on a 
determination that extenuating circumstances, acceptable to the agency 
concerned, have prevented the employee from completing the sale and 
purchase or lease termination transactions in the initial timeframe and 
that the residence transactions are reasonably related to the transfer 
of official station.
    (iv) When an employee is eligible for an extension of the time 
limitations for completion of a residence transaction and such an 
extension is approved by an agency, relocation entitlements and 
allowances shall be determined by using the entitlements and allowances 
prescribed by regulations in effect on the employee's effective date of 
transfer and not the entitlements and allowances in effect at the time 
the extension of the time limitation is approved. (See Sec. 302-1.3(d).)
    (f) Reimbursement of expenses. The rules in paragraphs (f) (1) and 
(2) of this section govern the reimbursement of employee residence 
transaction expenses.
    (1) Employee must actually incur the expenses. An employee shall be 
reimbursed only for expenses actually incurred and paid by the employee 
or a member of the employee's immediate family. If any expenses were 
shared by persons other than the employee or a member of his/her 
immediate family, reimbursement is limited to the portion actually paid 
by the employee and/or a member of his/her immediate family.
    (2) Pro rata reimbursement. When the title possessed by an employee 
and/or a member(s) of his/her immediate family is not full title to the 
residence, or when an employee is deemed to have a title interest under 
paragraph (c)(3) of this section, the employee shall be reimbursed on a 
pro rata basis to the extent of his/her actual title interest plus his/
her deemed title interest in the residence. Additionally, an employee 
shall be reimbursed on a pro rata basis in the situations listed in 
paragraphs (f)(2) (i) and (ii) of this section.
    (i) Multiple occupancy dwelling. If the residence is a duplex or 
another type of multiple occupancy dwelling which is occupied only 
partially by the employee, or whenever the employee shares 
responsibility for a leased property (e.g., a shared apartment 
arrangement), expenses shall be reimbursed on a pro rata basis.
    (ii) Excess land. The employee shall be limited to pro rata 
reimbursement when he/she sells or purchases land in excess of that 
which reasonably relates to the residence site.
    (g) Transfer from a foreign area to a nonforeign area--(1) 
Definitions. For purposes of this paragraph, the following definitions 
apply:
    (i) Former nonforeign area official station. This term means the 
official station from which the employee was transferred when assigned 
to the post of duty in the foreign area.

[[Page 155]]

    (ii) Nonforeign area. Nonforeign area includes the United States, 
its territories or possessions, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or the former Canal Zone 
area (i.e., areas and installations in the Republic of Panama made 
available to the United States pursuant to the Panama Canal Treaty of 
1977 and related agreements (as described in section 3(a) of the Panama 
Canal Act of 1979)).
    (iii) Foreign area. Foreign area refers to any area not defined as a 
nonforeign area.
    (2) Applicability. The provisions of this part are applicable, as 
specified in this paragraph, to employees who have completed an agreed 
upon tour of duty in a foreign area and instead of being returned to the 
former nonforeign area official station, are reassigned or transferred 
in the interest of the Government to a different nonforeign area 
official station than the official station from which the employee was 
transferred when assigned to the foreign post of duty. The distance 
between the former and new official stations must meet the mileage 
criteria specified in Sec. 302-1.7 for short distance transfers.
    (3) Authorized reimbursement. Generally, an employee is required to 
serve at least one tour of duty in a foreign area and retain a residence 
in a nonforeign area with the expectation of returning to the former 
official station in the nonforeign area. However, there are instances 
when an employee completes a tour of duty in a foreign area and is 
subsequently transferred to a different official station or post of duty 
in a nonforeign area than the one from which he/she transferred when 
assigned to the foreign post of duty. When this type of transfer is 
authorized or approved, reimbursement is allowable for real estate 
expenses required to be paid by the employee in connection with:
    (i) The sale of the residence (or the settlement of an unexpired 
lease) at the official station from which the employee was transferred 
when he/she was assigned to a post of duty located in a foreign area; 
and
    (ii) The purchase of a residence at the new official station when 
the employee is transferred in the interest of the Government from a 
post of duty located in a foreign area to a nonforeign area official 
station (other than the official station from which he/she was 
transferred when assigned to the foreign post of duty).
    (4) Reimbursement limitations. Reimbursement under this paragraph is 
prohibited for any sale (or settlement of an unexpired lease) or 
purchase transaction that occurs prior to the employee's first being 
officially notified (generally in the form of a change of official 
station travel authorization) that instead of returning to the former 
nonforeign area official station, he/she will be reassigned or 
transferred to a different nonforeign area official station than the one 
from which he/she was transferred when assigned to the foreign post of 
duty.
    (5) Service agreement required. A signed service agreement shall be 
required as prescribed in Sec. 302-1.5 for any employee who is eligible 
for reimbursement of residence transaction expenses authorized under 
this paragraph.

[54 FR 20321, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 2, 54 FR 37811, 
Sept. 13, 1989; 54 FR 43521, Oct. 25, 1989; FTR Amdt. 10, 55 FR 41538, 
Oct. 12, 1990; FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23658, May 23, 1991; 56 FR 29439, 
June 27, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 37, 
59 FR 27489, May 27, 1994; FTR Amdt. 62, 62 FR 13765, Mar. 21, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 302-6.2  Reimbursable and nonreimbursable expenses.

    (a) Brokers' fees and real estate commissions. A broker's fee or 
real estate commission paid by the employee for services in selling his/
her residence is reimbursable but not in excess of rates generally 
charged for such services by the broker or by brokers in the locality of 
the old official station. No such fee or commission is reimbursable in 
connection with the purchase of a home at the new official station.
    (b) Other advertising, selling, and appraisal expenses. Costs of 
newspaper, bulletin board, multiple-listing services, and other 
advertising for sale of the residence at the old official station are 
reimbursable if the employee has not paid for such services in the form 
of a broker's fee or real estate agent's commission. The customary cost 
of an appraisal also may be reimbursed.

[[Page 156]]

    (c) Legal and related expenses. To the extent such costs have not 
been included in brokers' or similar services for which reimbursement is 
claimed under other categories, the following expenses are reimbursable 
with respect to the sale and purchase of residences if they are 
customarily paid by the seller of a residence at the old official 
station or if customarily paid by the purchaser of a residence at the 
new official station, to the extent they do not exceed amounts 
customarily charged in the locality of the residence: costs of (1) 
searching title, preparing abstract, and legal fees for a title opinion, 
or (2) where customarily furnished by the seller, the cost of a title 
insurance policy; costs of preparing conveyances, other instruments, and 
contracts and related notary fees and recording fees; costs of making 
surveys, preparing drawings or plats when required for legal or 
financing purposes; and similar expenses. Costs of litigation are not 
reimbursable.
    (d) Miscellaneous expenses--(1) Reimbursable items. The following 
expenses are reimbursable in connection with the sale and/or purchase of 
a residence, provided they are customarily paid by the seller of a 
residence in the locality of the old official station or by the 
purchaser of a residence at the new official station, to the extent they 
do not exceed specifically stated limitations, or in the absence 
thereof, amounts customarily paid in the locality of the residence:
    (i) FHA or VA fee for the loan application.
    (ii) Loan origination fees and similar charges such as loan 
assumption fees and loan transfer fees. A loan origination fee is a fee 
paid by the borrower to compensate the lender for administrative type 
expenses incurred in originating and processing a loan. Reimbursement 
for a loan assumption fee or a loan transfer fee or a similar charge 
also may be allowed, if it is assessed in lieu of a loan origination fee 
and reflects charges for services similar to those covered by a loan 
origination fee. An employee may be reimbursed for these fees in an 
amount not in excess of 1 percent of the loan amount without itemization 
of the lender's administrative charges. Reimbursement may exceed 1 
percent only if the employee shows by clear and convincing evidence 
that:
    (A) The higher rate does not include prepaid interest, points, or a 
mortgage discount; and
    (B) The higher rate is customarily charged in the locality where the 
residence is located.
    (iii) Cost of preparing credit reports.
    (iv) Mortgage and transfer taxes.
    (v) State revenue stamps.
    (vi) Other fees and charges similar in nature to those listed in 
paragraphs (d)(1)(i) through (v) of this section, unless specifically 
prohibited in paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
    (vii) Charge for prepayment of a mortgage or other security 
instrument in connection with the sale of a residence at the old 
official station to the extent the terms in the mortgage or other 
security instrument provide for this charge. This prepayment penalty is 
also reimbursable when the mortgage or other security instrument does 
not specifically provide for prepayment, provided this penalty is 
customarily charged by the lender, but in that case the reimbursement 
may not exceed 3 months' interest on the loan balance.
    (viii) Mortgage title insurance policy, paid for by the employee, on 
a residence purchased by the employee for the protection of, and 
required by, the lender.
    (ix) Owner's title insurance policy, provided it is a prerequisite 
to financing or the transfer of the property; or if the cost of the 
owner's title insurance policy is inseparable from the cost of other 
insurance which is a prerequisite to financing or the transfer of the 
property.
    (x) Expenses in connection with construction of a residence, which 
are comparable to expenses that are reimbursable in connection with the 
purchase of an existing residence.
    (xi) Expenses in connection with environmental testing and property 
inspection fees when required by Federal, State, or local law; or by the 
lender as a precondition to sale or purchase.
    (2) Nonreimbursable items. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section, the following items of expense are not 
reimbursable:

[[Page 157]]

    (i) Owner's title insurance policy, ``record title'' insurance 
policy, mortgage insurance or insurance against loss or damage of 
property, and optional insurance paid for by the employee in connection 
with the purchase of a residence for the protection of the employee;
    (ii) Interest on loans, points, and mortgage discounts;
    (iii) Property taxes;
    (iv) Operating or maintenance costs;
    (v) No fee, cost, charge, or expense determined to be part of the 
finance charge under the Truth in Lending Act, title I, Pub. L. 90-321, 
as amended, and Regulation Z issued by the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System (12 CFR part 226), unless specifically authorized 
in paragraph (d)(1) of this section; and
    (vi) Expenses that result from construction of a residence.
    (e) Losses due to prices or market conditions at the old and new 
posts of duty. Losses are not reimbursable when they are incurred by an 
employee:
    (1) Due to failure to sell a residence at the old official station 
at the price asked, or at its current appraised value, or at its 
original cost;
    (2) Due to failure to buy a dwelling at the new official station at 
a price comparable to the selling price of the residence at the old 
official station; or
    (3) Any similar losses.
    (f) Other expenses of sale and purchase of residences. Incidental 
charges made for required services in selling and purchasing residences 
may be reimbursable if they are customarily paid by the seller of a 
residence at the old official station or if customarily paid by the 
purchaser of a residence at the new official station, to the extent they 
do not exceed amounts customarily charged in the locality of the 
residence.
    (g) Overall limitations--(1) Sale of the residence at the old 
official station. The total amount of expenses that an agency may 
reimburse in connection with the sale of the residence at the old 
official station shall not exceed 10 percent of the actual sales price 
of the residence.
    (2) Purchase of a residence at the new official station. The total 
amount of expenses that an agency may reimburse in connection with the 
purchase of a residence at the new official station shall not exceed 5 
percent of the actual purchase price of the residence.
    (h) Settlement of an unexpired lease. Expenses incurred for settling 
an unexpired lease (including month-to-month rental) for residence 
quarters occupied by the employee at the old official station may 
include broker's fees for obtaining a sublease or charges for 
advertising an unexpired lease. Such expenses are reimbursable when (1) 
applicable laws or the terms of the lease provide for payment of 
settlement expenses, (2) such expenses cannot be avoided by sublease or 
other arrangement, (3) the employee has not contributed to the expense 
by failing to give appropriate lease termination notice promptly after 
he/she has definite knowledge of the transfer, and (4) the broker's fees 
or advertising charges are not in excess of those customarily charged 
for comparable services in that locality. Itemization of these expenses 
is required and the total amount shall be entered on an appropriate 
travel voucher. This voucher may be submitted separately or with a claim 
that is to be made for expenses incident to the purchase of a dwelling. 
Each item must be supported by documentation showing that the expense 
was in fact incurred and paid by the employee.

[54 FR 20321, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 21, 56 FR 51177, 
Oct. 10, 1991; FTR Amdt. 27, 57 FR 45001, Sept. 30, 1992; FTR Amdt. 31, 
58 FR 53137, Oct. 14, 1993; FTR Amdt. 40, 59 FR 46357, Sept. 8, 1994; 
FTR Amdt. 44, 60 FR 49348, Sept. 25, 1995; FTR Amdt. 59, 62 FR 13756, 
Mar. 21, 1997; 62 FR 26375, May 13, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 302-6.3  Procedural and control requirements.

    (a) Application for reimbursement and documentation of expenses. 
Employees shall be furnished appropriate forms for claiming 
reimbursement for expenses of real estate transactions. Agencies shall 
prescribe a claim application form which meets internal administrative 
requirements. The form should include the most commonly incurred items 
of expense for which reimbursement may be claimed and any necessary 
administrative approval blocks. Amounts claimed must be supported by 
documentation showing that

[[Page 158]]

the expense was in fact incurred and paid by the employee. Included in 
the required supporting documents (as appropriate) are copies of (1) the 
sales agreement, (2) the purchase agreement, (3) property settlement 
documents, (4) loan closing statements, and (5) invoices or receipts for 
other bills paid. An appropriate voucher shall be prepared by the 
employee and used in transmitting the claim application with supporting 
attachments. Reimbursement may be in two parts; i.e., a payment for 
expenses incurred in the sale of the former residence and a payment for 
expenses incurred in the purchase of a new dwelling.
    (b) Review and administrative approval of sale and purchase 
expenses. Applications shall be reviewed by a responsible official of 
the agency. The application for reimbursement of expenses for the sale 
of a residence shall be sent to the claimant's old official station for 
review and approval of the claim unless agency review and approval 
functions are performed elsewhere. In case of transfer between agencies, 
review and approval of the application shall be made, if appropriate, at 
an installation of the hiring agency in the locality of the employee's 
old official station, but if the hiring agency has no appropriate 
installation, it shall be sent to the losing agency at the old official 
station for review and approval. This review and approval are intended 
to be limited to determining whether the expenses claimed are reasonable 
in amount and customarily paid by the seller in the locality where the 
property is located. If items of cost appear to have been inflated or 
are higher than normally imposed for similar services in the locality, 
any portion of such costs determined to be excessive shall be 
disallowed. When approved, the application shall be returned with such 
memorandum of explanation as may be appropriate. A similar review and 
approval are required in connection with an application for 
reimbursement of the expenses of the purchase of a new dwelling. Final 
administrative approval of payment of the claim must be executed by an 
appropriate approving official. Such official may accept as conclusive 
the required prior approvals covering reasonableness and custom; he/she 
shall, however, in accordance with the provisions of this part, 
independently determine whether (1) the aggregate amount of expenses 
claimed in connection with a sale or purchase of a residence is within 
the prescribed limitation for either, (2) all conditions and 
requirements under which allowances may be paid have been met, and (3) 
the expenses themselves are those which are reimbursable. The employee's 
claim accompanied by the application and supporting documents shall be 
completed and submitted in accordance with the usual procedures of the 
agency concerned.
    (c) Assistance provided by local offices of the Department of 
Housing and Urban Development. Technical assistance in determining the 
reasonableness of an expense may be obtained from the local or area 
office of the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) serving 
the area in which the expense occurred. The local office maintains and 
can furnish upon request a current Form HUD-92496, Schedule of Closing 
Costs, applicable to the area. This is a schedule of closing costs 
typically encountered in connection with the purchase and sale of single 
family properties in the locality. For the purpose of determining 
whether the expenses claimed are reasonable and may be approved for 
reimbursement, these closing costs should be used as guidelines and not 
as rigid limitations. The local office will also furnish upon request 
information concerning local custom and practices with respect to 
charging of closing costs related to either a sale or purchase, 
including information as to whether such costs are customarily paid by 
the seller or purchaser and the local terminology used to describe them. 
Area or insuring offices of HUD are located in all major cities. The 
mailing addresses for these offices are included in the U.S. Government 
Manual, published annually by the Office of the Federal Register, 
National Archives and Records Administration. A directory containing the 
addresses of all such offices (HUD Form 788) is available at any HUD 
office.
    (d) Violation of employment agreement. In the event the employee 
violates the terms of the agreement required under Sec. 302-1.5, no 
expenses will be paid, and

[[Page 159]]

any amounts paid prior to such violation shall be a debt due the United 
States until they are paid by the employee.

[54 FR 20321, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-6.4  Exclusions.

    The provisions of this part do not apply to new appointees, or 
employees assigned under the Government Employees Training Act (5 U.S.C. 
4109).

[54 FR 20321, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-6.5  Advance of funds.

    No advance of funds is authorized in connection with the allowances 
provided in this part.

[54 FR 20321, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28635, 
June 26, 1992]


<R03>
PART 302-7--TRANSPORTATION OF MOBILE HOMES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
302-7.1  Eligibility and limitations.
302-7.2  Computation of distances.
302-7.3  Computation of allowances.
302-7.4  Limitation on allowances.
302-7.5  Advance of funds.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5738; 20 U.S.C. 905(a); E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13474, 
3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: 54 FR 20323, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 302-7.1  Eligibility and limitations.

    (a) Eligibility. An employee who is entitled to transportation of 
his/her household goods under part 302-8 shall, instead of such 
transportation, be entitled to an allowance, as provided in this part, 
for the transportation of a mobile home for use as a residence. To be 
eligible for the allowance, the employee shall certify in a manner 
prescribed by the head of the employing agency that the mobile home is 
for use as a residence for the employee and/or his/her immediate family 
at the destination. If an employee is not eligible to receive an 
allowance for movement of his/her mobile home, he/she may be eligible to 
receive an allowance based on the transportation of his/her household 
goods under part 302-8.
    (b) Geographic limitations--(1) Overland transportation. Allowances 
for transportation of mobile homes overland may be made only for 
transportation of such homes within the continental United States 
(CONUS), within Alaska, and through Canada en route between Alaska and 
CONUS. Allowances for transportation within the limits prescribed may be 
paid even though the transportation involved originates, terminates, or 
passes through locations not covered, provided the amount of the 
allowance shall be computed on the basis of that part of the 
transportation which is within CONUS, within Alaska, or through Canada 
en route between Alaska and CONUS.
    (2) Over-water transportation. Allowances for transportation of 
mobile homes over-water may be made only for transportation of such 
homes from a point of origin either within CONUS or within Alaska to a 
destination point either within CONUS or within Alaska.
    (c) Relationship to other allowances. Allowances for transporting 
mobile homes (including mileage when towed by employee) are in addition 
to payment of per diem, mileage, and transportation expenses for 
employees and their immediate families. However, the fact that a mobile 
home may be moved at Government expense only if the employee certifies 
that it is to be used as a residence at the destination should be 
considered in determining allowances to be paid under parts 302-4, 302-
5, and 302-6.

[54 FR 20323, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 20, 56 FR 46989, 
Sept. 17, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 302-7.2  Computation of distances.

    (a) Standard highway mileage. Where points of origin and destination 
are within the continental United States and Alaska, the allowable 
distance between these points shall be that shown in the standard 
highway mileage guides or actual miles driven as determined from 
odometer readings. (Actual odometer readings need not be shown on the 
travel voucher.) Any substantial deviation from distances shown in the 
standard highway mileage guides shall be explained.

[[Page 160]]

    (b) Islands involved. In addition to mileage, if the point of origin 
or destination is an island within the boundaries of one of the 
continental United States or Alaska and a ferry is used in 
transportation of a mobile home, the statute mileage between the island 
and the usual place of arrival or departure on the mainland shall be 
allowed, except that when such mileage is included in the standard 
highway mileage guides the mileage shown therein shall be used.
    (c) Unauthorized transportation involved. Where point of origin or 
destination, or both, are not in the continental United States or 
Alaska, the allowable distance shall be limited to the distance which 
the mobile home is transported within or between any of the continental 
United States and Alaska, and through Canada en route between Alaska and 
the continental United States. In such instances, the mileage shall be 
computed as provided in paragraph (a) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 302-7.3  Computation of allowances.

    (a) Transportation by commercial carrier. When a mobile home is 
transported by commercial carrier, an allowance for transportation costs 
shall include the following (see paragraph (d) of this section for 
preparation fees also allowable as transportation costs):
    (1) The carrier's charges for actual transportation of the mobile 
home in an amount not exceeding the applicable tariff as approved by the 
Interstate Commerce Commission (or appropriate State regulatory body for 
intrastate movements) for transportation of a mobile home of the size 
and type involved for the distance involved, provided any substantial 
deviation from mileage shown in the standard highway mileage guides is 
explained;
    (2) Ferry fares and bridge, road, and tunnel tolls;
    (3) Taxes, charges or fees fixed by a State or other government 
authority for permits to transport mobile homes in or through its 
jurisdiction;
    (4) Carrier's service charges for obtaining necessary permits; and
    (5) Charges for a pilot (flag) car or escort services, when such 
services are required by State or local law.
    (b) Transportation by private means--(1) Overland transportation. 
When a mobile homes is transported overland by means other than a 
commercial carrier, such as when it is towed by a privately owned 
conveyance, an allowance of 11 cents per mile shall be made as 
reimbursement for the transportation costs listed in paragraph (a) of 
this section. In addition, an agency may pay the costs of preparing a 
mobile home for movement and resettling it at the destination as 
provided in paragraph (d) of this section. No other allowance shall be 
made for transportation of the mobile home under this part. However, in 
addition to the 11-cent allowance and the allowance under paragraph (d) 
of this section, an agency may pay the mileage allowance for use of a 
privately owned conveyance as provided in Sec. 302-2.3.
    (2) Transportation over-water. When a boat used as a primary 
residence is transported over-water, an allowance for transportation 
costs shall include, but not be limited to:
    (i) The cost of fuel and oil used for propulsion of the boat;
    (ii) The cost of pilots or navigators in the open water;
    (iii) The cost of a crew;
    (iv) Charges for harbor pilots;
    (v) The cost of docking fees incurred in transit;
    (vi) Harbor or port fees and similar charges relating to entry in 
and navigation through ports; and
    (vii) The cost of towing, whether in tow or towing by pushing from 
behind.
    (c) Mixed method of transportation. When a mobile home is 
transported partly by commercial carrier and partly by private means, 
the allowances described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section apply 
to the respective portions of the transportation.
    (d) Other allowable transportation costs. In addition to the 
allowances provided for in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section, 
an allowance for transportation shall include costs generally associated 
with preparing a mobile home at a point of origin inside Alaska or CONUS 
for movement and resettling the mobile home at the destination inside 
Alaska or CONUS. Any costs for preparing a mobile home located outside 
Alaska or CONUS for movement,

[[Page 161]]

and any costs for resettling a mobile home outside Alaska or CONUS shall 
not be reimbursed. Preparation costs include but are not limited to:
    (1) The costs of blocking and unblocking (including anchoring and 
unanchoring);
    (2) The labor costs of removing and installing skirting;
    (3) The cost of separating, preparing, and sealing each section for 
movement;
    (4) The cost of reassembling the two halves of a double-wide mobile 
home; and
    (5) Travel lift fees.
    (e) Unallowable costs. An individual's transportation allowance 
shall not include the following costs (see part 302-3 which relates to 
the miscellaneous expenses allowance):
    (1) All costs for replacement parts, tire purchases, structural 
repairs, brake repairs, or any other repairs or maintenance performed;
    (2) Costs of insurance for valuation of mobile homes above carriers' 
maximum liabilities, or charges designated in the tariffs as ``Special 
Service;''
    (3) Costs of storage; and
    (4) Costs of connecting and disconnecting appliances, equipment, and 
utilities involved in relocation and costs of converting appliances for 
operation on available utilities.
    (f) Optional use of Government bill of lading. Instead of the 
allowances to the employee provided in paragraphs (a) through (e) of 
this section, the agency may, when it determines such action to be in 
the Government's interest, assume direct responsibility for 
transportation of an employee's mobile home, issuing necessary bills of 
lading, and paying the costs involved. In such instances, the employee 
shall not receive any other allowance for the transportation involved 
and shall be charged any cost the Government must pay under the bill of 
lading which would not be allowed under this section or which is in 
excess of that allowable under Sec. 302-7.4.

[FTR Amdt. 20, 56 FR 46990, Sept. 17, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 302-7.4  Limitation on allowances.

    The total amount allowable in Sec. 302-7.3 shall not exceed the 
maximum amount which would be allowable for transportation and 90 days' 
temporary storage of the employee's household goods if, instead of 
moving a mobile home, the maximum quantity of household goods allowable 
under Sec. 302-8.2 had been moved.


<R05>
Sec. 302-7.5  Advance of funds.

    An advance of funds may be allowed an employee for the 
transportation of a mobile home under the requirements provided in 
Sec. 302-1.14(a). The amount of advance shall not exceed either the 
estimated amount allowable under Sec. 302-7.3(a) of the construction 
cost determined under Sec. 302-7.4. No advance is authorized when a 
Government bill of lading is used as provided in     Sec. 302-7.3(f).

[FTR Amdt. 20, 56 FR 46990, Sept. 17, 1991]


<R03>
PART 302-8--TRANSPORTATION AND TEMPORARY STORAGE OF HOUSEHOLD GOODS AND PROFESSIONAL BOOKS, PAPERS, AND EQUIPMENT--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
302-8.1  Applicability.
302-8.2  General limitations.
302-8.3  Transportation within the continental United States.
302-8.4  Transportation outside the continental United States.
302-8.5  Temporary storage.
302-8.6  Advance of funds.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5738; 20 U.S.C. 905(a); E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13474, 
3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: 54 FR 20324, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 302-8.1  Applicability.

    Employees covered by this subtitle who have complied with the 
general requirements as contained in part 302-1 are eligible for 
transportation and temporary storage of their household goods subject to 
the provisions of this part when they are transferred, regardless of 
whether the official stations involved are within or outside the 
continental United States, are appointed to positions in which 
Government transportation to the first official station is allowable, or 
are separated after

[[Page 162]]

completion of a period of service overseas.

[54 FR 20324, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-8.2  General limitations.

    (a) Maximum weight allowance. The maximum weight of household goods 
that may be transported or stored at Government expense is limited to 
18,000 pounds net weight for all employees. The total weight of 
household goods stored under Sec. 302-9.2 plus the weight of household 
goods transported under this part shall not exceed the maximum weight 
allowance prescribed in this paragraph.
    (b) Professional books, papers, and equipment. (1) For purposes of 
this part, the term ``professional books, papers, and equipment'' 
includes those professional or specialized items and other materials 
which are personally owned by the employee for use in the performance of 
official duties. The term does not include sports equipment or office, 
household, or shop fixtures and furniture; e.g., bookcases, file 
cabinets, desks, and racks of any kind even though used in connection 
with the professional books, papers, and equipment.
    (2) There is no statutory authority to transport personally owned 
professional books, papers, and equipment in addition to the maximum 
weight allowance (Sec. 302-8.2(a)) established by law for transportation 
of an employee's household goods and personal effects. However, there 
may be instances in which the weight of the professional books, papers, 
and equipment would cause an employee's household goods shipment to be 
in excess of the maximum weight allowance. In such instances, the 
personally owned professional books, papers, and equipment may be 
transported to the new permanent duty station as an administrative 
expense of an agency (not chargeable to travel and transportation 
appropriations). Shipment of these items as an administrative expense 
would be instead of shipment as an allowance of the employee.
    (3) Authority to transport professional books, papers, and equipment 
as an administrative expense shall be subject to agency policy and 
discretion within the following guidelines:
    (i) The employee shall furnish an itemized inventory of professional 
books, papers, and equipment for review by an appropriate authorizing 
official at the new permanent duty station. In addition, the employee 
shall furnish appropriate evidence (as determined by the agency 
concerned) that transporting the itemized materials as part of the 
employee's household goods would result in an excess of the employee's 
maximum weight allowance.
    (ii) The authorizing official at the new permanent duty station 
shall review and certify that the professional books, papers, and 
equipment as itemized are necessary in the proper performance of the 
employee's duties at the new duty station and that if these items were 
not transported to the new duty station, the same or similar items would 
have to be obtained at Government expense for the employee's use at the 
new duty station.
    (iii) When professional books, papers, and equipment are certified 
as provided in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section and shipped for the 
employee as an administrative expense of an agency, shipment shall be by 
the actual expense method; the commuted rate method shall not be used. 
When shipped in the same lot with the employee's household goods and 
other personal effects under the actual expense method, the professional 
books, papers, and equipment shall be packed and weighed separately; the 
weight thereof and the administrative appropriation chargeable shall be 
stated as separate items on the Government bill of lading. In unusual 
instances in which it is impractical or impossible to obtain separate 
weights, a constructive weight of 7 pounds per cubic foot may be used.
    (c) Determining the net weight--(1) Uncrated shipments. When 
household goods are shipped uncrated as in a household mover's van or 
similar conveyance, the net weight shall be that shown on the bill of 
lading or on the weight certificate attached thereto, which, under 
Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) regulations, includes the weight of 
barrels, boxes, cartons, and similar materials used in packing,

[[Page 163]]

but does not include pads, chains, dollies, and other equipment needed 
to load and secure the shipment. When a noncommercial means of shipment 
is involved (see Sec. 302-8.3(a)(3)), the ICC regulations shall apply 
for determining the net weight. When an employee's claim is based on 
constructive weight as authorized in paragraph (c)(4) of this section, 
the net weight shall be the weight as determined under that provision.
    (2) Crated shipments. When property is transported crated, the net 
weight shall not include the weight of the crating material. The net 
weight shall be computed as being 60 percent of the gross weight. 
However, if the net weight computed in this manner exceeds the 
applicable weight limitation and if it is determined that, for reasons 
beyond the employee's control, unusually heavy crating and packing 
materials were necessarily used, the net weight may be computed at less 
than 60 percent of the gross weight.
    (3) Containerized shipments. When special containers designed 
normally for repeated use, such as lift vans, CONEX transporters, and 
household-goods shipping boxes are used and the known tare weight does 
not include the weight of interior bracing and padding materials but 
only the weight of the container, the net weight of the household goods 
shall be 85 percent of the gross weight less the weight of the 
container. If the known tare weight includes interior bracing and 
padding materials so that the net weight is the same as it would be for 
uncrated shipments in interstate commerce, the net weight shall not be 
subject to the reduction. If the gross weight of the container cannot be 
obtained, the net weight of the household goods shall be determined from 
the cubic measurement on the basis of 7 pounds per cubic foot of 
properly loaded container space.
    (4) Constructive weight. If no adequate scale is available at point 
of origin, at any point en route, or at destination, a constructive 
weight, based on 7 pounds per cubic foot of properly loaded van space, 
may be used. Such constructive weight also may be used for a part-load 
when its weight could not be obtained at origin, en route, or at 
destination, without first unloading it or other part-loads being 
carried in the same vehicle, or when the household goods are not weighed 
because the carrier's charges for a local or metropolitan area move are 
properly computed on a basis other than the weight or volume of the 
shipment (as when payment is based on an hourly rate and the distance 
involved). However, in such instances the employee should obtain a 
statement from the carrier showing the amount of properly loaded van 
space required for the shipment. (See also Sec. 302-8.3(a)(3) with 
respect to proof of entitlement to a commuted rate payment when net 
weight cannot be shown.)
    (d) Temporary storage time limit. The time allowable for temporary 
storage in connection with an authorized shipment of household goods 
shall not exceed a period of 90 days. This time period also applies when 
an employee returns to his/her place of actual residence for leave 
before serving a new tour of duty outside the continental United States 
either at a different post of duty or at the same post of duty if the 
storage is provided instead of furnished quarters or a quarters 
allowance. However, upon an employee's written request, the initial 90-
day period may be extended an additional period not to exceed 90 days 
under certain conditions if approved by the agency head or his/her 
designee. Justification for an additional storage period may include, 
but is not limited to, the following reasons:
    (1) An intervening temporary duty or long-term training assignment;
    (2) Nonavailability of suitable housing;
    (3) Completion of residence under construction;
    (4) Serious illness of employee or illness or death of a dependent; 
or
    (5) Strikes, acts of God, or other circumstances beyond the control 
of the employee.
    (e) Origin and destination. Cost of transportation of household 
goods may be paid by the Government whether the shipment originates at 
the employee's last official station or place of residence or at some 
other point, or if part of the shipment originates at the last official 
station and the remainder at one or more other points. Similarly,

[[Page 164]]

these expenses are allowable whether the point of destination is the new 
official station or some other point selected by the employee, or if the 
destination for part of the property is the new official station and the 
remainder is shipped to one or more other points. However, the total 
amount which may be paid or reimbursed by the Government shall not 
exceed the cost of transporting the property in one lot by the most 
economical route from the last official station of the transferring 
employee (or the place of actual residence of the new appointee at time 
of appointment) to the new official station. In connection with return 
from overseas for separation, see Sec. 302-1.12(d). No property acquired 
by the employee en route between old and new official stations shall be 
eligible for transportation under this part.
    (f) Loss and damage liability. Limitations on the Government's 
liability for loss or damage of an employee's household goods are 
contained in the Military Personnel and Civilian Employees' Claims Act 
of 1964 (31 U.S.C. 3721-3723) and in agency rules and regulations issued 
under the authority thereof. Since agency practices and regulations 
under that Act differ, and in view of the different circumstances under 
which household goods are transported and temporarily stored under the 
authority of this part, each agency should advise transferred employees 
of the applicability and restrictions on claims against the Government 
for loss and damage as related to the transportation circumstances 
involved. Agencies should also be prepared to give advice to employees 
as to the liability of the carrier for loss and damage of transported 
household goods in the transportation circumstances involved so that 
they will be able to evaluate the need for insurance and the 
advisability of incurring a valuation charge. (For interstate shipments 
by motor carrier on commercial bills of lading, see 49 CFR part 1056.)

[54 FR 20324, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-8.3  Transportation within the continental United States.

    (a) The commuted rate system--(1) Description. Under the commuted 
rate system an employee makes his/her own arrangements for transporting 
household goods between points within the continental United States. He/
She selects and pays the carrier or transports his/her goods by 
noncommercial means and is reimbursed by the Government in accordance 
with schedules of commuted rates which are contained in the GSA 
publication, Commuted Rate Schedule for Transportation of Household 
Goods. Agencies requiring this publication shall prepare a Standard Form 
1, Printing and Binding Requisition, and send it to: Superintendent of 
Documents, Departmental Account Representative Division, U.S. Government 
Printing Office (GPO), Washington, DC 20401. The schedules of commuted 
rates which are developed from tariffs that carriers have filed with the 
Interstate Commerce Commission consist of tables to be applied to the 
particular transportation involved. The commuted rate includes costs of 
line-haul transportation, packing, crating, unpacking, drayage incident 
to transportation, and other accessorial charges. Costs of temporary 
storage which are subject to reimbursement under Sec. 302-8.5 are stated 
separately in the schedule of commuted rates.
    (2) Reimbursement. When the commuted rate system is used, the amount 
to be paid to the employee for transportation and related services is 
computed by multiplying the number of hundreds of pounds shipped (within 
the maximum weight allowance) by the applicable rate per hundred pounds 
for the distance shipped as shown in the commuted rate schedule. The 
distance shall be determined in accordance with household goods mileage 
guides filed with the Interstate Commerce Commission. If the rate is not 
shown in the commuted rate schedule for the exact mileage, the rate 
shown for the next greater distance applies. If an employee is charged a 
minimum weight above the actual weight of his/her household goods under 
the applicable tariff (other than one based on expedited or special 
services), the reimbursement shall be based on the minimum weight as 
charged instead of the actual weight of the goods.
    (3) Documentation. Claims for reimbursement under the commuted rate

[[Page 165]]

system shall be supported by a receipted copy of the bill of lading (a 
reproduced copy may be accepted) including any attached weight 
certificate copies if such a bill was issued. If no bill of lading was 
involved, other evidence showing points of origin and destination and 
the weight of the goods must be submitted. Employees who transport their 
own household goods are cautioned to establish the weight of such goods 
by obtaining proper weight certificates showing gross weight (weight of 
vehicle and goods) and tare weight (weight of vehicle alone) because 
compliance with the requirements for payment at commuted rates on the 
basis of constructive weight (see Sec. 302-8.2(c)(4)) usually is not 
possible.
    (b) Actual expense method--(1) Description. Under the actual expense 
method, the Government assumes responsibility for awarding contracts and 
for other negotiations with carriers. The property is shipped on a 
Government bill of lading, and the Government audits and pays 
transportation vouchers directly to carriers. Under the actual expense 
method, the household goods are shipped by the Government, not by the 
employee.
    (2) Agency responsibility. Selection of the carrier, arranging for 
carrier services and for packing and crating, preparing the Government 
bill of lading, paying charges incurred, and processing any loss and 
damage claims are the direct responsibility of the agency.
    (3) Allowable charges. The actual costs of transportation of 
household goods within the authorized weight limits will be allowed at 
Government expense. Also, within that weight limit, the actual costs for 
packing, crating, unpacking, drayage incident to transportation, and 
necessary accessorial services shall be allowed.
    (4) Multiple shipment procedures. When the actual expense method is 
used in shipping household goods belonging to two or more employees 
between the same two points, the weight of the household goods of each 
employee is to be identified for the purpose of applying the maximum 
weight limitations.
    (5) Excess weight procedures. When the weight of an employee's 
household goods exceeds the maximum weight limitation, the total 
quantity may be shipped on a Government bill of lading, but the employee 
shall reimburse the Government for the cost of transportation and other 
charges applicable to the excess weight, computed from the total charges 
according to the ratio of excess weight to the total weight of the 
shipment.
    (c) Use of commuted rate or actual expense method--(1) 
Considerations. When the commuted rate system is used, the Government is 
relieved of the responsibility and administrative expense of selecting 
and dealing with carriers and making other arrangements for transporting 
employees' household goods; however, the Government cannot take 
advantage of special discounts which may be offered. On the other hand, 
when the actual expense method is used, the Government incurs the 
additional expenses of selecting and dealing with carriers, preparing 
bills of lading, auditing and paying transportation vouchers, 
supervising the packing of household goods, handling employee loss and 
damage claims, and other incidentals.
    (2) Estimating costs. Under the commuted rate system, an accurate 
estimate of cost depends upon the accuracy of the estimate of weight. 
However, under the actual expense method the cost to the Government will 
usually depend not only on the weight involved but also on the 
accessorial services required, the quality of packing and the quantity 
of individual cartons, boxes, barrels, and wardrobes used by the carrier 
in packing. When the commuted rate system is used, the packing and 
accessorial charges are authorized and paid for by the employee from the 
amounts allowed for those charges under that system. Under the actual 
expense method, the accessorial and packing charges are paid by the 
Government, and if those charges are high, they may more than offset any 
discount in the line-haul rate which may be available for shipments by 
Government bill of lading. A proper comparison of costs must take into 
account the line-haul transportation charge, the administrative costs as 
indicated in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, and the expected 
accessorial and packing charges.

[[Page 166]]

    (3) Policy. The general policy is that commuted rates shall be used 
for transportation of employees' household goods when individual 
transfers are involved, and that appropriate action, depending on the 
amount of goods to be transported, shall be taken to estimate and 
compare actual expense method costs with commuted rate costs when groups 
of employees are transferred between the same official stations at 
approximately the same time so that the method resulting in less cost to 
the Government may be used. Specific procedures to be followed are 
contained in paragraph (c)(4) of this section.
    (4) Criteria for use of the actual expense method--(i) Individual 
transfers. Agency experience with the actual expense method has shown 
that shipment by Government bill of lading does not result in savings 
simply because a line-haul discount is available. Therefore, the 
commuted rate system shall be used for individual transfers without 
consideration being given the actual expense method; except that the 
actual expense method may be used if the actual costs to be incurred by 
the Government for packing and other accessorial services are 
predetermined (at least as to price per 100 pounds) and if that method 
is expected to result in a real savings to the Government of $100 or 
more. (For intrastate transfers, see paragraph (c)(4)(iv) of this 
section.)
    (ii) Multiple transfers. Under general rate tenders arranged by GSA 
and the Department of Defense (DOD), participating carriers agree to 
transport the household goods of Government employees at rates below 
commercial rates for specific periods of time. These tenders are 
arranged under 49 U.S.C. 10721, and no further agency negotiation is 
necessary to take advantage of them. Agencies shall evaluate the use of 
such rates when, because of the transfer of several employees, they have 
a large volume of household goods to be moved between the same places at 
the same time even though no mass move is involved; however, the added 
costs for use of the actual expense method, as discussed in paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section, and the uncertainty as to total cost for packing 
and accessorial services, as discussed in paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section, shall be taken into consideration, and the actual expense 
method shall be selected only if it is considered likely that a real 
savings to the Government will result from the use of that method.
    (iii) Mass moves. Whenever an entire facility is being relocated or 
whenever it is anticipated that 10 or more shipments of household goods 
are to be transported between the same two points at approximately the 
same time, the agency involved shall notify the appropriate regional or 
zonal office of the General Services Administration (for civilian 
agencies without specialized transportation personnel) or the 
appropriate transportation office of DOD (for components of that 
Department) of the forthcoming move so that an analysis can be made of 
existing available rates for use under the actual expense method. The 
notification shall be accompanied by all pertinent information 
concerning points of origin and destination, estimated weights of 
property, the number of persons or different families involved, and 
dates or periods of time when each person or family is expected to move. 
When appropriate, the GSA or DOD transportation organization shall 
attempt to arrange with carriers for worthwhile reduced rates and shall 
advise the agency concerned of the results of such efforts. If these 
efforts show that a saving will result, considering all direct and 
indirect costs involved, the actual expense method shall be used. 
Otherwise, the commuted rate system shall be used.
    (iv) Unusual circumstances. The commuted rates do not take into 
account intrastate rates that in some instances may be substantially 
higher than the interstate rates that form the basis for the commuted 
rates. In order to avoid the necessity of prescribing commuted rates for 
such circumstances, the actual expense method (Government bill of 
lading) may be used when it is administratively determined that the 
commuted rate system would cause an unusual hardship for an employee 
transferring between official stations within a State. This authority 
shall not be used indiscriminately, and its use shall be carefully 
documented and justified.

[54 FR 20324, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, 
June 26, 1992]

[[Page 167]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-8.4  Transportation outside the continental United States.

    (a) Coverage. This section contains special rules which are 
applicable to the transportation of household goods at Government 
expense to, from, and between points outside the continental United 
States. Individual eligibility is covered in part 302-1.
    (b) Weight limitation. The maximum weight specified in Sec. 302-8.2 
is applicable; however, where furnished or partly furnished quarters are 
to be provided outside the continental United States (in the case of a 
transfer to such a station) or have been provided (in the case of a 
return to the continental United States), agencies shall make an 
appropriate reduction in the weight of household goods which may be 
authorized for shipment at Government expense.
    (c) Allowable costs--(1) Actual expense basis. Transportation 
authorized under this section shall be on an actual expense basis. 
Actual expense includes costs of transportation of household goods, 
packing and crating (including packing and crating materials and 
temporary containers), unpacking, and other necessary accessorial 
charges within applicable limits.
    (2) Drayage. If door-to-door common carrier rates are not 
applicable, allowable costs include the actual costs of drayage to and 
from the common carrier for goods not in excess of the authorized 
weight.
    (3) Lift vans. Charges allowable for packing and crating and for 
transportation include expenses incurred in hiring, transporting, and 
packing lift vans when shipments are made in whole or in part by water, 
but do not include charges in connection with any shipment or storage of 
empty lift vans or import duties on lift vans.
    (4) Valuation. The valuation of property as declared for shipping 
will not exceed that to which the lowest freight rates will apply except 
as provided in paragraph (e)(3) of this section.
    (d) Procedures applicable--(1) Transportation and related services. 
The allowable transportation and related services may be obtained by the 
agency concerned from any available commercial carrier, except that all 
shipments of property by water shall be made on ships registered under 
the laws of the United States whenever such ships are available.
    (2) Use of Government bill of lading. Commercial shipments will be 
made on Government bills of lading or purchase orders whenever possible; 
otherwise, reimbursement shall be made to the employee for 
transportation expenses actually and necessarily incurred within the 
limitations prescribed by this section.
    (3) Itemization of charges. If the services rendered cover, in 
addition to transportation, other services such as packing, crating, 
drayage, unpacking, and temporary storage, the total charge for the 
services shall be itemized to show the charge for each service.
    (e) Services in excess of those authorized--(1) By means other than 
selected. An employee may elect to have his/her household goods moved by 
some means other than the means selected by the Government, except as 
noted in paragraph (d)(1) of this section relating to transportation by 
foreign flag vessels, on the condition that he/she will pay the amount, 
if any, by which the charges for the means of transportation selected by 
him/her exceed the charges for the means of transportation selected by 
the Government.
    (2) Excess weight. If household goods in excess of the weight 
allowable under this regulation are shipped on a Government bill of 
lading or purchase order, the employee shall promptly upon completion of 
the shipment pay the proper agency official for the excess cost. The 
excess cost shall be computed from the total charges according to the 
ratio of excess weight to the total weight of the shipment.
    (3) Excess valuation or insurance. An employee may declare a 
valuation above the minimum permitted if he/she assumes all additional 
expenses resulting therefrom, including the cost of insurance needed to 
protect the higher valuation. (See Sec. 302-8.2(f).)

[54 FR 20324, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-8.5  Temporary storage.

    (a) Applicability. Temporary storage of household goods at 
Government expense may be allowable only when such

[[Page 168]]

storage is incident to transportation of the household goods at 
Government expense.
    (b) Allowable expenses--(1) Commuted rate system. In connection with 
transportation within the continental United States under the commuted 
rate system, costs of temporary storage within the applicable weight 
limit will be reimbursed to the employee in the amount of his/her costs 
for storage including in and out charges and necessary drayage, but not 
to exceed the commuted rates for storage in the GSA publication, 
Commuted Rate Schedule for Transportation of Household Goods. (See 
Sec. 302-8.3(a)(1).) A receipted copy of the warehouse or other bill for 
storage costs is required to support reimbursement.
    (2) Actual expense method. In connection with transportation within 
or outside the United States when the actual expense method is used, the 
Government will normally arrange for necessary temporary storage and pay 
the cost thereof direct. If an employee must arrange for temporary 
storage in connection with transportation by the actual expense method, 
he/she may be reimbursed for reasonable costs incurred for storage 
including in and out charges and necessary drayage within the applicable 
limitations. Charges for excess weight, valuation above the minimum 
amount, and services obtained by the employee at higher costs shall be 
the responsibility of the employee in the same manner as he/she is 
responsible for excess costs incident to transportation. (See Secs. 302-
8.3(b)(5) and 302-8.4(e).)


<R05>
Sec. 302-8.6  Advance of funds.

    (a) Commuted rate system. Advances of funds may be made to employees 
up to the estimated amount of the commuted payment for the cost of 
authorized transportation and temporary storage of their household goods 
under the procedures and policies prescribed in Sec. 302-1.14(a).
    (b) Overseas shipments. For overseas shipment, advance of funds may 
be made for the estimated cost of transportation and temporary storage 
only if the cost of authorized transportation and temporary storage will 
not be paid directly by the Government, as is the case when a Government 
bill of lading or purchase order is used.
    (c) Procedures. In requesting an advance of funds, the employee 
shall submit a written statement designating:
    (1) The points of origin and destination,
    (2) The estimated weight of household goods to be shipped, and
    (3) Any anticipated temporary storage not to exceed a period of 90 
days at Government expense. The estimate of weight required in support 
of an advance of funds shall consist of a statement of the estimated 
weight signed by the carrier selected to handle the shipment, if 
available. If not available, evidence of actual weight or a reasonable 
estimate thereof acceptable to the agency shall be furnished.


<R03>
PART 302-9--ALLOWANCES FOR NONTEMPORARY STORAGE OF HOUSEHOLD GOODS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
302-9.1  Nontemporary storage during assignment to isolated locations in 
          the continental United States.
302-9.2  Nontemporary storage during assignment outside the continental 
          United States.
302-9.3  Storage during school recess for Department of Defense overseas 
          teachers.
302-9.4  Advance of funds.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5738; 20 U.S.C. 905(a); E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13474, 
3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: 54 FR 20328, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 302-9.1  Nontemporary storage during assignment to isolated locations in the continental United States.

    (a) Policy. Nontemporary storage of household goods belonging to an 
employee transferred or a new appointee assigned to an official station 
at an isolated location in the continental United States shall be 
allowed only when it is clearly justified under the conditions in this 
part and is not primarily for the convenience or at the request of the 
employee or the new appointee.
    (b) Isolated official stations--criteria. Under this section, an 
official station

[[Page 169]]

at an isolated location is a place of permanent duty assignment in the 
continental United States at which an employee has no alternative except 
to live where he/she is unable to use his/her household goods because:
    (1) The type of quarters he/she is required to occupy at the 
isolated permanent duty station will not accommodate his/her household 
goods; or
    (2) Residence quarters which would accommodate his/her household 
goods are not available within reasonable daily commuting distance of 
the official station. However, the designation of an official station as 
isolated in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section shall not 
preclude a determination in individual instances that adequate housing 
is available for some employees stationed there based on housing which 
may be available within daily commuting distance and the size and other 
characteristics of each employee's immediate family. In such instances, 
the station shall not be considered isolated with regard to those 
employees for whom adequate family housing is determined to be 
available.
    (c) Isolated official stations--designation. Heads of agencies 
concerned are responsible for designating the isolated official stations 
at which conditions exist for allowing nontemporary storage of household 
goods at Government expense for some or all employees.
    (d) Eligibility. Eligibility for nontemporary storage of household 
goods and personal effects applies to an employee stationed at an 
isolated official station, which meets the criteria in paragraph (b) of 
this section, who performed permanent change of station travel or travel 
as a new appointee.
    (e) Authorization. The authorization for nontemporary storage should 
be contained in the travel order or other document authorizing transfer 
or appointment at an isolated official station. However, storage may be 
approved subsequently if the employee or new appointee is otherwise 
eligible.
    (f) Allowable storage--(1) Place of storage. Under regulations 
prescribed by the head of the agency concerned, the property may be 
stored either in available Government-owned storage space or in suitable 
commercial or privately owned space obtained by the Government if 
Government-owned space is not available or if commercial or privately 
owned space is more economical or suitable because of location, 
difference of transportation costs, or for other reasons.
    (2) Allowable costs. Allowable costs for storing the property 
include the cost of necessary packing, crating, unpacking, uncrating, 
transportation to and from place of storage, charges while in storage, 
and other necessary charges directly relating to the storage.
    (3) Partial storage. An eligible employee or new appointee may be 
authorized to have a portion of his/her household goods transported to 
the isolated official station and to have the remainder stored at 
Government expense. However, the weight of the goods stored plus the 
weight of the goods transported shall not exceed the maximum applicable 
weight allowance for which the employee is eligible.
    (4) Changes in type of storage. Authority may be granted for the 
conversion of household goods from temporary to nontemporary storage and 
from storage at personal expense to nontemporary storage at Government 
expense.
    (g) Time limitations. Nontemporary storage shall be authorized for 
periods of time not exceeding 1 year and extended as necessary in 
accordance with the length of an employee's assignment at an isolated 
official station. Appropriate periodic review shall be made to determine 
whether current conditions at the isolated locality with regard to 
availability of housing warrant continuation of the authority for 
nontemporary storage. Eligibility for nontemporary storage at Government 
expense shall terminate on the employee's last day of active duty at the 
isolated official station. When an employee ceases to be eligible, 
nontemporary storage at Government expense may continue until the 
beginning of the second month after the month in which his eligibility 
terminates. However, the period of nontemporary storage shall not exceed 
3 years.

[54 FR 20328, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, 
June 26, 1992]

[[Page 170]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-9.2  Nontemporary storage during assignment outside the continental United States.

    (a) Eligibility. Under regulations that may be prescribed by the 
head of the agency concerned, an employee stationed at an official 
station other than one located in the continental United States or an 
employee or new appointee transferred or appointed to such a station may 
be allowed nontemporary storage of his/her household goods while so 
assigned if:
    (1) The official station is one to which he/she is not authorized to 
take, or at which he/she is unable to use, the household goods; or
    (2) The storage is authorized in the public interest; or
    (3) The estimated cost of storage would be less than the cost of 
round-trip transportation (including temporary storage) of the household 
goods to the new official station.
    (b) Authorization. Normally, the authorization for nontemporary 
storage shall be contained in the travel order or other document 
authorizing the employee's change of station or authorizing a new 
appointee to report to his/her official station. However, storage may be 
approved subsequently if the employee or new appointee would otherwise 
be eligible.
    (c) Allowable storage--(1) Place of storage. The property may be 
stored either in available Government-owned storage space or in suitable 
commercial or privately owned space if Government-owned space is not 
available or if commercial or privately owned space obtained by the 
Government is more economical or suitable because of location, 
difference of transportation costs, or other reasons.
    (2) Allowable costs. Allowable costs for storing the property 
include the cost of necessary packing, crating, unpacking, uncrating, 
transportation to and from place of storage, charges while in storage, 
and other necessary charges directly relating to the storage.
    (3) Partial storage. The employee or new appointee may be authorized 
to have a portion of his/her goods transported to the official station 
unless it is a station to which he/she is not authorized to take, or at 
which he/she is unable to use, any of the goods. However, the weight of 
the goods stored plus the weight of the goods transported shall not 
exceed the maximum applicable weight allowance for which the employee is 
eligible.
    (4) Change in type of storage. Authority may also be granted for the 
conversion of household goods from temporary to nontemporary storage at 
Government expense, and from storage at personal expense to nontemporary 
storage at Government expense, if the employee or new appointee is 
otherwise eligible.
    (d) Time limitations. Nontemporary storage at Government expense may 
be authorized for a period not to exceed the length of the employee's 
tour of duty at the overseas station plus 1 month prior to the time the 
tour begins. The storage period may be extended for subsequent service 
or tours of duty at the same or other overseas stations if the 
provisions of paragraph (a) of this section continue to be met. When an 
employee ceases to be eligible for the allowance, storage at Government 
expense may continue until the beginning of the second month after the 
month in which his/her eligibility terminates, unless to avoid inequity 
the agency extends the period. Eligibility shall be deemed to terminate 
on the last day of active duty at the overseas station.


<R05>
Sec. 302-9.3  Storage during school recess for Department of Defense overseas teachers.

    (a) Description. The Department of Defense Overseas Teachers Pay and 
Personnel Practices Act (20 U.S.C. 905) provides authority for the 
storage of the household goods of Department of Defense overseas 
teachers during the recess period between 2 consecutive school years.
    (b) Regulations. Storage of household goods of Department of Defense 
overseas teachers may be allowed at Government expense under regulations 
prescribed by the Secretary of Defense in accordance with this part.
    (c) Authorization and conditions--(1) Authorization. Storage during 
the school recess should be authorized prior to the close of the school 
year. However, storage may be approved at a

[[Page 171]]

later date if all the required terms and conditions have been fulfilled.
    (2) Agreement. To be eligible for recess storage, a teacher serving 
at the close of a school year must agree in writing to serve as a 
teacher for the next school year.
    (3) Forfeited entitlements. The storage shall be instead of quarters 
or quarters allowance authorized by 20 U.S.C. 905 and any other storage 
of household goods to which the teacher might be entitled through 
employment in another position during any recess period between 2 school 
years.
    (d) Allowable storage--(1) Place of storage. The property may be 
stored either in available Government-owned space or in suitable 
commercial or privately owned space if Government-owned space is not 
available or if commercial or privately owned space obtained by the 
Government is more economical or suitable because of location, 
difference of transportation costs, or other reasons.
    (2) Allowable costs. Allowable costs for storing the property 
include the cost of necessary packing, crating, unpacking, uncrating, 
transportation to and from place of storage, charges while in storage, 
and other necessary charges directly relating to the storage.
    (3) Weight limitations. The weight of the household goods stored 
during the recess period shall not exceed the weight authorized for the 
employee less the weight of household goods stored under Sec. 302-9.2.
    (e) Time limitation. The period of storage shall not exceed the 
period of the recess between the 2 school years.
    (f) Breach of agreement. If the teacher does not report for service 
at the beginning of the next school year, except for reasons beyond his/
her control and acceptable to the Department of Defense, he/she shall be 
obligated to reimburse the Department in the amount paid by the 
Department for the commercial storage, including related services. If, 
however, the property was stored in a Government facility, the teacher 
shall pay the agency an amount equal to the reasonable value of the 
storage furnished, including related services.

[54 FR 20328, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-9.4  Advance of funds.

    Advances of funds are not authorized in connection with the storage 
allowances covered by this part.

[54 FR 20328, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, 
June 26, 1992]


<R03>
PART 302-10--ALLOWANCES FOR TRANSPORTATION AND EMERGENCY STORAGE OF A PRIVATELY OWNED VEHICLE--Table of Contents

<R05>


                        Subpart A--General Rules

Sec.
302-10.1  What is a ``privately owned vehicle (POV)''?
302-10.2  What is an ``official station'' for purposes of this part?
302-10.3  What is a ``post of duty'' for purposes of this part?
302-10.4  What are the purposes of the allowance for transportation of a 
          POV?
302-10.5  What is the purpose of the allowance for emergency storage of 
          a POV?
302-10.6  What POV transportation and emergency storage may my agency 
          authorize at Government expense?
302-10.7  Must my agency authorize transportation or emergency storage 
          of my POV?
302-10.8  What type of POV may I be authorized to transport, and if 
          necessary, store under emergency circumstances?
302-10.9  For what transportation expenses will my agency pay?
302-10.10  For what POV emergency storage expenses will my agency pay?
302-10.11  May I receive an advance of funds for transportation and 
          emergency storage of my POV?
302-10.12  May my agency determine that driving my POV is more 
          advantageous and limit my reimbursement to what it would cost 
          to drive my POV?

          Subpart B--Transportation of a POV to a Post of Duty

                                 General

302-10.100  Who is eligible for transportation of a POV to a post of 
          duty?
302-10.101  In what situations may my agency authorize transportation of 
          a POV to my post of duty?
302-10.102  How many POV's may I transport to a post of duty?
302-10.103  Do I have to ship my POV to my actual post of duty?
302-10.104  What may I do if there is no port or terminal at the point 
          of origin and/or destination?

[[Page 172]]

                POV Transportation at Time of Assignment

302-10.140  Under what specific conditions may my agency authorize 
          transportation of a POV to my post of duty upon my assignment 
          to that post of duty?
302-10.141  What is the ``authorized point of origin'' when I transport 
          a POV to my post of duty?
302-10.142  What will I be reimbursed if I transport a POV from a point 
          of origin that is different from the authorized point of 
          origin?
302-10.143  When I am authorized to transport a POV, may I have the 
          manufacturer or the manufacturer's agent transport a new POV 
          from the factory or other shipping point directly to my post 
          of duty?

         POV Transportation Subsequent to the Time of Assignment

302-10.170  Under what specific conditions may my agency authorize 
          transportation of a POV to my post of duty subsequent to the 
          time of my assignment to that post of duty?
302-10.171  If circumstances warrant an authorization to transport a POV 
          to my post of duty after my assignment to the post of duty, 
          must I sign a new service agreement?
302-10.172  Under what conditions may my agency authorize transportation 
          of a replacement POV to my post of duty?
302-10.173  How many replacement POV's may my agency authorize me to 
          transport to my post of duty at Government expense?
302-10.174  What is the ``authorized point of origin'' when I transport 
          a POV, including a replacement POV, to my post of duty 
          subsequent to the time of my assignment to that post of duty?
302-10.175  When I am authorized to transport a POV, including a 
          replacement POV, to my post of duty subsequent to the time of 
          my assignment to that post of duty, may I have the 
          manufacturer or the manufacturer's agent transport a new POV 
          from the factory or other shipping point directly to my post 
          of duty?

      Subpart C--Return Transportation of a POV from a Post of Duty

302-10.200  When am I eligible for return transportation of a POV from 
          my post of duty?
302-10.201  In what situations will my agency pay to transport a POV 
          transported from my post of duty?
302-10.202  When do I become entitled to return transportation of my POV 
          from my post of duty to an authorized destination?
302-10.203  Is there any circumstance under which I may be authorized to 
          transport my POV from a post of duty before completing my 
          service agreement?
302-10.204  What is the ``authorized point of origin'' when I transport 
          my POV from my post of duty?
302-10.205  What is the ``authorized destination'' of a POV transported 
          under this subpart?
302-10.206  What should I do if there is no port or terminal at my 
          authorized point of origin or authorized destination when I 
          transport a POV from my post of duty?
302-10.207  What will I be reimbursed if I transport my POV from a point 
          of origin or to a destination that is different from my 
          authorized origin or destination?
302-10.208  If I retain my POV at my post of duty after conditions 
          change to make use of the POV no longer in the interest of the 
          Government, may I transport it at Government expense from the 
          post of duty at a later date?
302-10.209  Under what conditions may my agency authorize me to 
          transport from my post of duty a replacement POV purchased at 
          that post of duty?

Subpart D--Transportation of a POV Wholly Within the Continental United 
                             States (CONUS)

302-10.300  When am I eligible for transportation of my POV wholly 
          within CONUS at Government expense?
302-10.301  Under what conditions may my agency authorize transportation 
          of my POV wholly within CONUS?
302-10.302  How many POV's may I transport wholly within CONUS?
302-10.303  If I am authorized to transport my POV wholly within CONUS, 
          where must the transportation originate?
302-10.304  If I am authorized to transport my POV wholly within CONUS, 
          what must the destination be?

                  Subpart E--Emergency Storage of a POV

302-10.400  When am I eligible for emergency storage of my POV?
302-10-401  Where may I store my POV if I receive notice to evacuate my 
          immediate family and/or household goods from my post of duty?

                   Subpart F--Agency Responsibilities

302-10.500  What means of transportation may we authorize for POV's?
302-10.501  How should we administer the allowances for transportation 
          and emergency storage of a POV?

[[Page 173]]

302-10.502  What governing policies must we establish for the allowances 
          for transportation and emergency storage of a POV?
302-10.503  Under what condition may we authorize transportation of a 
          POV to a post of duty?
302-10.504  What factors must we consider in deciding whether to 
          authorize transportation of a POV to a post of duty?
302-10.505  What must we consider in determining whether transportation 
          of a POV wholly within CONUS is cost effective?

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5738; 20 U.S.C. 905(a); E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13474, 
3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: FTR Amdt. 65, 62 FR 13794, Mar. 21, 1997, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
                        Subpart A--General Rules

    Note to Supart A: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.1   What is a ``privately owned vehicle (POV)''?

    A motor vehicle not owned by the Government and used by the employee 
or his/her immediate family for the primary purpose of providing 
personal transportation.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.2  What is an ``official station'' for purposes of this part?

    An official station is defined in Sec. 302-1.4(k). For purposes of 
this part, an official station may be within or outside the continental 
United States (CONUS).


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.3  What is a ``post of duty'' for purposes of this part?

    An official station outside CONUS.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.4  What are the purposes of the allowance for transportation of a POV?

    To reduce the Government's overall relocation costs by allowing 
transportation of a POV to your official station within CONUS when it is 
advantageous and cost effective to the Government, and to improve your 
overall effectiveness if you are transferred or otherwise assigned to a 
post of duty at which it is in the interest of the Government for you to 
have use of a POV for personal transportation.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.5  What is the purpose of the allowance for emergency storage of a POV?

    To protect a POV transported at Government expense to your post of 
duty when the head of your agency determines that the post of duty is 
within a zone from which your immediate family and/or household goods 
should be evacuated.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.6  What POV transportation and emergency storage may my agency authorize at Government expense?

    Your agency may authorize:
    (a) Transportation of a POV to a post of duty as provided in subpart 
B of this part;
    (b) Transportation of a POV from a post of duty as provided in 
subpart C of this part;
    (c) Transportation of a POV wholly within CONUS as provided in 
subpart D of this part; and
    (d) Emergency storage of a POV as provided in subpart E of this 
part.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.7  Must my agency authorize transportation or emergency storage of my POV?

    No. However, if your agency does authorize transportation of a POV 
to your post of duty and you complete your service agreement, your 
agency must pay for the cost of returning the POV. Your agency 
determines the conditions under which it will pay for transportation and 
emergency storage and the procedures a transferred employee must follow.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.8  What type of POV may I be authorized to transport, and if necessary, store under emergency circumstances?

    Only a passenger automobile, station wagon, small truck, or other 
similar vehicle that will be used primarily for personal transportation. 
You may not transport or store a trailer, airplane, or any vehicle 
intended for commercial use.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.9  For what transportation expenses will my agency pay?

    When your agency authorizes transportation of your POV, it will pay 
for all necessary and customary expenses directly related to the 
transportation

[[Page 174]]

of the POV, including crating and packing expenses, shipping charges, 
and port charges for readying the POV for shipment at the port of 
embarkation and for use at the port of debarkation.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.10  For what POV emergency storage expenses will my agency pay?

    All necessary storage expenses, including but not limited to 
readying the POV for storage, local transportation to point of storage, 
storage, readying the POV for use after storage, and local 
transportation from the point of storage. Insurance on the POV is at 
your expense, unless it is included in the expenses allowed by this 
paragraph.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.11  May I receive an advance of funds for transportation and emergency storage of my POV?

    Yes, in accordance with Sec. 302-1.14(a) and not to exceed the 
estimated amount of the expenses authorized under this part for 
transportation and emergency storage of your POV.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.12  May my agency determine that driving my POV is more advantageous and limit my reimbursement to what it would cost to drive my POV?

    Yes. Your agency decides whether it is more advantageous for you 
and/or a member of your immediate family to drive your POV for all or 
part of the distance or to have it transported. If your agency decides 
that driving the POV is more advantageous, your reimbursement will be 
limited to the allowances provided in part 302-2 of this chapter for the 
travel and transportation expenses you and/or your immediate family 
incur en route.


<R04>
          Subpart B--Transportation of a POV to a Post of Duty

    Note to Subpart B: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.

                                 General


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.100  Who is eligible for transportation of a POV to a post of duty?

    An employee who is authorized to transfer to the post of duty, or a 
new appointee or a student trainee assigned to the post of duty.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.101  In what situations may my agency authorize transportation of a POV to my post of duty?

    Your agency may authorize transportation when:
    (a) At the time of your assignment, conditions warrant such 
authorization under Sec. 302-10.140;
    (b) Subsequent to the time of your assignment conditions, which did 
not warrant authorization at the time of your assignment, change to 
warrant such authorization under Sec. 302-10.170; or
    (c) Subsequent to the time of your assignment, conditions warrant 
authorization under Sec. 302-10.172 of a replacement POV.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.102  How many POV's may I transport to a post of duty?

    One. This does not, however, limit the transportation of a 
replacement POV when authorized under Sec. 302-10.172.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.103  Do I have to ship my POV to my actual post of duty?

    Yes. You may not transport the POV to an alternate location.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.104  What may I do if there is no port or terminal at the point of origin and/or destination?

    Your agency will pay the entire cost of transporting the POV from 
your point of origin to your destination. If you prefer, however, you 
may choose to drive your POV from your point of origin at time of 
assignment to the nearest embarkation port or terminal, and/or from the 
debarkation port or terminal nearest your destination to your post of 
duty at any time. If you choose to drive, you will be reimbursed your 
one-way mileage cost, at the rate specified in part 301-4 of this 
subtitle, for

[[Page 175]]

driving the POV from your authorized origin to deliver it to the port of 
embarkation, or from the port of debarkation to the authorized 
destination. For the segment of travel from the port of embarkation back 
to your authorized origin after delivering the POV to the port, or from 
your authorized destination to the port of debarkation to pickup the 
POV, you will be reimbursed your one-way transportation cost. The total 
cost of round-trip travel, to deliver the POV to the port at the origin 
or to pickup the POV at the port at your destination, may not exceed the 
cost of transporting the POV to or from the port involved. You may not 
be reimbursed a per diem allowance for round-trip travel to and from the 
port involved.

                POV Transportation at Time of Assignment


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.140  Under what specific conditions may my agency authorize transportation of a POV to my post of duty upon my assignment to that post of duty?

    Your agency may authorize transportation when:
    (a) It has determined in accordance with Sec. 302-10.503 of this 
part that it is in the interest of the Government for you to have use of 
your POV at the post of duty;
    (b) You have signed a service agreement; and
    (c) You meet any specific conditions your agency has established.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.141  What is the ``authorized point of origin'' when I transport a POV to my post of duty?

    Your ``authorized point of origin'' is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Your ``authorized point of origin''
          If you are a--                            is--                
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(a) A transferee                    Your old official station.          
(b) A new appointee or student      Your place of actual residence.     
 trainee                                                                
------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.142  What will I be reimbursed if I transport a POV from a point of origin that is different from the authorized point of origin?

    You will be reimbursed the transportation costs you incur, not to 
exceed the cost of transporting your POV from your authorized point of 
origin to your post of duty.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.143  When I am authorized to transport a POV, may I have the manufacturer or the manufacturer's agent transport a new POV from the factory or other 
          shipping point directly to my post of duty?

    Yes, provided:
    (a) You purchased the POV new from the manufacturer or 
manufacturer's agent;
    (b) The POV is transported FOB-shipping point, consigned to you and/
or a member of your immediate family, or your agent; and
    (c) Ownership of the POV is not vested in the manufacturer or the 
manufacturer's agent during transportation. In this circumstance, you 
will be reimbursed for the POV transportation costs, not to exceed the 
cost of transporting the POV from your authorized point of origin to 
your post of duty.

         POV Transportation Subsequent to the Time of Assignment


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.170  Under what specific conditions may my agency authorize transportation of a POV to my post of duty subsequent to the time of my assignment to 
          that post of duty?

    Your agency may authorize transportation when:
    (a) You do not have a POV at your post of duty;
    (b) You have not previously been authorized to transport a POV to 
that post of duty;
    (c) You have not previously transported a POV outside CONUS during 
your assignment to that post of duty;
    (d) Your agency has determined in accordance with Sec. 302-10.503 
that it is in the interest of the Government for you to have use of your 
POV at the post of duty;
    (e) You signed a service agreement at the time you were transferred 
in the interest of the Government, or assigned if you were a new 
appointee or student trainee, to your post of duty; and
    (f) You meet any specific conditions your agency has established.

[[Page 176]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.171  If circumstances warrant an authorization to transport a POV to my post of duty after my assignment to the post of duty, must I sign a new 
          service agreement?

    No, provided you signed a service agreement at the time of your 
assignment to the post of duty. Violation of that service agreement, 
however, will result in your personal liability for the cost of 
transporting the POV.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.172  Under what conditions may my agency authorize transportation of a replacement POV to my post of duty?

    Your agency may authorize a replacement POV when:
    (a) You require an emergency replacement POV and you meet the 
following conditions:
    (1) You had a POV which was transported to your post of duty at 
Government expense; and
    (2) You require a replacement POV for reasons beyond your control 
and acceptable to your agency, such as when the POV is stolen, or 
seriously damaged or destroyed, or has deteriorated due to conditions at 
the post of duty; and
    (3) Your agency determines in advance of authorization that a 
replacement POV is necessary and in the interest of the Government; or
    (b) You require a non-emergency replacement POV and you meet the 
following conditions:
    (1) You have a POV which was transported to a post of duty at 
Government expense;
    (2) You have been stationed continuously during a 4-year period at 
one or more posts of duty; and
    (3) Your agency has determined that it is in the Government's 
interest for you to continue to have a POV at your post of duty.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.173  How many replacement POV's may my agency authorize me to transport to my post of duty at Government expense?

    Your agency may authorize one emergency replacement POV within any 
4-year period of continuous service. It may authorize one non-emergency 
replacement POV after every four years of continuous service beginning 
on the date you first have use of the POV being replaced.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.174  What is the ``authorized point of origin'' when I transport a POV, including a replacement POV, to my post of duty subsequent to the time of my 
          assignment to that post of duty?

    Your agency determines the authorized point of origin within the 
United States.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.175  When I am authorized to transport a POV, including a replacement POV, to my post of duty subsequent to the time of my assignment to that post 

          of duty, may I have the manufacturer or the manufacturer's 
          agent transport a new POV from the factory or other shipping 
          point directly to my post of duty?

    Yes, under the same conditions specified in Sec. 302-10.143 of this 
subpart.


<R04>
      Subpart C--Return Transportation of a POV From a Post of Duty

    Note to Subpart C: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.200  When am I eligible for return transportation of a POV from my post of duty?

    You are eligible for return transportation when:
    (a) You were transferred to a post of duty in the interest of the 
Government; and
    (b) You transported a POV under this part to the post of duty.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.201  In what situations will my agency pay to transport a POV transported from my post of duty?

    Your agency will pay when:
    (a) You are transferred back to the official station (including post 
of duty) from which you transferred to your current post of duty;
    (b) You are transferred to a new official station within CONUS;
    (c) You are transferred to a new post of duty, where your agency 
determines that use of a POV at that location is not in the interest of 
the Government;
    (d) You separate from Government service after completion of an 
agreed period of service at the post of duty to

[[Page 177]]

which the POV was transported under this part;
    (e) You separate from Government service prior to completion of an 
agreed period of service at the post of duty to which the POV was 
transported under this part, and the separation is for reasons beyond 
your control and acceptable to your agency; or
    (f) Conditions change at your post of duty such that use of the POV 
no longer is in the interest of the Government.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.202  When do I become entitled to return transportation of my POV from my post of duty to an authorized destination?

    You become entitled when:
    (a) You transported a POV to your post of duty at Government 
expense;
    (b) You have the POV at that post of duty; and
    (c) You have completed your service agreement.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.203  Is there any circumstance under which I may be authorized to transport my POV from a post of duty before completing my service agreement?

    Yes. If conditions change at your post of duty such that use of your 
POV no longer is in the interest of the Government, or if you separate 
from Government service prior to completion of your service agreement 
for reasons beyond your control and acceptable to your agency, your 
agency may authorize return transportation to your authorized 
destination. When the return transportation is based on changed 
conditions, you still are required to complete your service agreement. 
If you do not, you will be required to repay the transportation costs.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.204  What is the ``authorized point of origin'' when I transport my POV from my post of duty?

    The last post of duty to which you were authorized to transport your 
POV at Government expense.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.205  What is the ``authorized destination'' of a POV transported under this subpart?

    The ``authorized destination'' is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              The authorized destination
                    If--                     of the POV you transport at
                                               Government expense is--  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(a) You are transferred to an official       Your official station.     
 station within CONUS,                                                  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(b)(1) You are transferred to another post   Your place of actual       
 of duty and use of a POV at the new post     residence.                
 is not in the interest of the Government;                              
(2) You separate from Government service     Your place of actual       
 and are eligible for transportation of       residence.                
 your POV from your post of duty; or                                    
(3) Conditions change at your post of duty   Your place of actual       
 such that use of your POV no longer is in    residence.                
 the interest of the Government at that                                 
 post of duty,                                                          
------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.206  What should I do if there is no port or terminal at my authorized point of origin or authorized destination when I transport a POV from my post 
          of duty?

    Your agency will pay the entire cost of transporting the POV from 
your authorized origin to your authorized destination. If you prefer, 
however, you may choose to drive your POV to the port of embarkation 
and/or from the port of debarkation. If you choose to drive, you will be 
reimbursed in the same manner as an employee covered under Sec. 302-
10.104.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.207  What will I be reimbursed if I transport my POV from a point of origin or to a destination that is different from my authorized origin or 
          destination?

    You will be reimbursed the transportation costs you actually incur, 
not to exceed what it would have cost to transport your POV from your 
authorized origin to the authorized destination.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.208  If I retain my POV at my post of duty after conditions change to make use of the POV no longer in the interest of the Government, may I 
          transport it at Government expense from the post of duty at a 
          later date?

    Yes, your agency will pay the transportation costs not to exceed the 
cost of transporting it to the authorized destination, provided you 
otherwise meet all conditions for transportation of a POV.

[[Page 178]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.209  Under what conditions may my agency authorize me to transport from my post of duty a replacement POV purchased at that post of duty?

    Your agency may authorize transportation only if:
    (a) At the time you purchased the replacement POV, you met the 
conditions in Sec. 302-10.172 of this part; and
    (b) Prior to purchase of the replacement POV, your agency authorized 
you to purchase a replacement POV at the post of duty.


<R04>
Subpart D--Transportation of a POV Wholly Within the Continental United 
                             States (CONUS)

    Note to Subpart D: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.300  When am I eligible for transportation of my POV wholly within CONUS at Government expense?

    When you are an employee who transfers within CONUS in the interest 
of the Government, or you are a new appointee or student trainee 
relocating to your first official station within CONUS.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.301  Under what conditions may my agency authorize transportation of my POV wholly within CONUS?

    Your agency will authorize transportation only when:
    (a) It has determined that use of your POV to transport you and/or 
your immediate family from your old official station (or place of actual 
residence, if you are a new appointee or student trainee) to your new 
official station would be advantageous to the Government;
    (b) Both your old official station (or place of actual residence, if 
you are a new appointee or student trainee) and your new official 
station are located within CONUS; and
    (c) Your agency further determines that it would be more 
advantageous and cost effective to the Government to transport your POV 
to the new official station at Government expense and to pay for 
transportation of you and/or your immediate family by commercial means 
than to have you or an immediate family member drive the POV to the new 
official station.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.302  How many POV's may I transport wholly within CONUS?

    You may transport any number of POV's under this subpart, provided 
your agency determines such transportation is advantageous and cost 
effective to the Government.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.303  If I am authorized to transport my POV wholly within CONUS, where must the transportation originate?

    The POV transportation must originate as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Your transportation must originate 
           If you are--                             at--                
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(a) A transferee,                   Your old official station.          
(b) A new appointee or student      Your place of actual residence.     
 trainee,                                                               
------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.304  If I am authorized to transport my POV wholly within CONUS, what must the destination be?

    Your new official station.


<R04>
                  Subpart E--Emergency Storage of a POV

    Note to Subpart E: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.400  When am I eligible for emergency storage of my POV?

    You are eligible when:
    (a) Your POV was transported to your post of duty at Government 
expense; and
    (b) The head of your agency determines that your post of duty is 
within a zone from which your immediate family and/or household goods 
should be evacuated.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.401  Where may I store my POV if I receive notice to evacuate my immediate family and/or household goods from my post of duty?

    You may store your POV at a place determined to be reasonable by 
your agency whether the POV is already located at, or being transported 
to, your post of duty.

[[Page 179]]


<R04>
                   Subpart F--Agency Responsibilities

    Note to Subpart F: Use of the pronouns ``we'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.500  What means of transportation may we authorize for POV's?

    (a) Commercial means if available at reasonable rates and under 
reasonable conditions; or
    (b) Government means on a space-available basis.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.501  How should we administer the allowances for transportation and emergency storage of a POV?

    To minimize costs and to promote an efficient workforce by providing 
an employee use of his/her POV when it mutually benefits the Government 
and the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.502  What governing policies must we establish for the allowances for transportation and emergency storage of a POV?

    You must establish policies governing:
    (a) When you will authorize transportation and emergency storage of 
a POV;
    (b) When you will authorize transportation of a replacement POV;
    (c) Who will determine if transportation of a POV to or from a post 
of duty is in the interest of the Government;
    (d) Who will determine if conditions have changed at an employee's 
post of duty to warrant transportation of a POV in the interest of the 
Government;
    (e) Who will determine if transportation of a POV wholly within 
CONUS is more advantageous and cost effective than having the employee 
drive the POV to the new official station; and
    (f) Who will determine whether to allow emergency storage of an 
employee's POV, including where to store the POV.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.503  Under what condition may we authorize transportation of a POV to a post of duty?

    You may authorize transportation only when you determine, after 
consideration of the factors in Sec. 302-10.504, that it is in the 
interest of the Government for the employee to have use of a POV at the 
post of duty.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.504  What factors must we consider in deciding whether to authorize transportation of a POV to a post of duty?

    You must consider:
    (a) Whether local conditions at the employee's post of duty warrant 
use of a POV;
    (b) Whether use of the POV will contribute to the employee's 
effectiveness on the job;
    (c) Whether use of a POV of the type involved will be suitable under 
local conditions at the post of duty;
    (d) Whether the cost of transporting the POV to and from the post of 
duty will be excessive, considering the time the employee has agreed to 
serve at the post of duty.


<R05>
Sec. 302-10.505  What must we consider in determining whether transportation of a POV wholly within CONUS is cost effective?

    (a) Cost of travel by POV.
    (b) Cost of transporting the POV.
    (c) Cost of travel if the POV is transported.
    (d) Productivity benefit you derive from the employee's accelerated 
arrival at the new official station.


<R03>
PART 302-11--RELOCATION INCOME TAX (RIT) ALLOWANCE--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
302-11.1  Authority.
302-11.2  Coverage.
302-11.3  Types of moving expenses or allowances covered and general 
          limitations.
302-11.4  Exclusions from coverage.
302-11.5  Definitions and discussion of terms.
302-11.6  Procedures in general.
302-11.7  Procedures for determining the WTA in Year 1.
302-11.8  Rules and procedures for determining the RIT allowance in Year 
          2.
302-11.9  Responsibilities.
302-11.10  Claims for payment and supporting documentation and 
          verification.
302-11.11  Violation of service agreement.
302-11.12  Advance of funds.
302-11.13  Source references.
Appendix A to Part 302-11--Federal Tax Tables for RIT Allowance
Appendix B to Part 302-11--State Tax Tables for RIT Allowance

[[Page 180]]

Appendix C to Part 302-11--Federal Tax Tables for RIT Allowance--Year 2
Appendix D to Part 302-11--Puerto Rico Tax Tables for RIT Allowance

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5738; 20 U.S.C. 905(a); E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13474, 
3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: 54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 302-11.1  Authority.

    Payment of a relocation income tax (RIT) allowance is authorized to 
reimburse eligible transferred employees for substantially all of the 
additional Federal, State, and local income taxes incurred by the 
employee, or by the employee and spouse if a joint tax return is filed, 
as a result of certain travel and transportation expenses and relocation 
allowances which are furnished in kind, or for which reimbursement or an 
allowance is provided by the Government. Payment of the RIT allowance 
also is authorized for income taxes paid to the Commonwealth of Puerto 
Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the U.S. 
possessions in accordance with a decision of the Comptroller General of 
the United States (67 Comp. Gen. 135 (1987)). The RIT allowance shall be 
calculated and paid as provided in this part.

[FTR Amdt. 30, 58 FR 15437, Mar. 23, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 302-11.2  Coverage.

    (a) Eligible employees. Payment of a RIT allowance is authorized for 
employees transferred on or after November 14, 1983, in the interest of 
the Government from one official station to another for permanent duty. 
The effective date of an employee's transfer is the date the employee 
reports for duty at the new official station as provided in Sec. 302-
1.4(l).
    (b) Individuals not covered. The provisions of this part are not 
applicable to the following individuals or employees:
    (1) New appointees;
    (2) Employees assigned under the Government Employees Training Act 
(see 5 U.S.C. 4109); or
    (3) Employees returning from overseas assignments for the purpose of 
separation.

[54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23658, May 
23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-11.3  Types of moving expenses or allowances covered and general limitations.

    The RIT allowance is limited by law as to the types of moving 
expenses that can be covered. The law authorizes reimbursement of 
additional income taxes resulting from certain moving expenses furnished 
in kind or for which reimbursement or an allowance is provided to the 
transferred employee by the Government. However, such moving expenses 
are covered by the RIT allowance only to the extent that they are 
actually paid or incurred, and are not allowable as a moving expense 
deduction for tax purposes. The types of expenses or allowances listed 
in paragraphs (a) through (i) of this section, are covered by the RIT 
allowance within the limitations discussed.
    (a) En route travel. Travel (including per diem) and transportation 
expenses of the transferred employee and immediate family for en route 
travel from the old official station to the new official station. (See 
part 302-2.)
    (b) Household goods shipment. Transportation (including temporary 
storage) expenses for movement of household goods from the old official 
station to the new official station. (See part 302-8.)
    (c) Nontemporary storage expenses. Allowable expenses for 
nontemporary storage of household goods belonging to an employee 
transferred on or after November 14, 1983, through October 11, 1984, to 
an isolated location in the continental United States. (See Sec. 302-
9.1.) Nontemporary storage expenses are not covered by the RIT allowance 
for transfers on or after October 12, 1984. (See Sec. 302-11.4(c).)
    (d) Mobile home movement. Expenses for the movement of a mobile home 
for use as a residence when movement is authorized instead of shipment 
and temporary storage of household goods. (See part 302-7.)

[[Page 181]]

    (e) Househunting trip. Travel (including per diem) and 
transportation expenses of the employee and spouse for one round trip to 
the new official station to seek permanent residence quarters. (See part 
302-4.)
    (f) Temporary quarters. Subsistence expenses of the employee and 
immediate family during occupancy of temporary quarters. (See part 302-
5.)
    (g) Real estate expenses. Allowable expenses for the sale of the 
residence (or expenses of settlement of an unexpired lease) at the old 
official station and for purchase of a home at the new official station 
for which reimbursement is received by the employee. (See part 302-6.)
    (h) Miscellaneous expense allowance. A miscellaneous expense 
allowance for the purpose of defraying certain expenses associated with 
discontinuing a residence at one location and establishing a residence 
at the new location in connection with an authorized or approved 
permanent change of station. (See part 302-3.)
    (i) Relocation services. Payments, or portions thereof, made to a 
relocation service company for services provided to a transferred 
employee (see part 302-12), subject to the conditions stated in this 
paragraph and within the general limitations of this section applicable 
to other covered expenses.
    (1) For employees transferred on or after November 14, 1983, through 
October 11, 1984. The amount of a broker's fee or real estate 
commission, or other real estate sales transaction expenses which 
normally are reimbursable to the employee under Sec. 302-6.2 but have 
been paid by a relocation service company incident to an assigned sale 
from the employee, provided that such payments constitute income to the 
employee. For the purposes of this regulation, an assigned sale occurs 
when an employee obtains a binding agreement for the sale of his/her 
residence and assigns the inherent rights and obligations of that 
agreement to a relocation company that is providing services under 
contract with the employing agency. For example, if the employee incurs 
an obligation to pay a specified broker's fee or real estate commission 
under the terms of the sales agreement, this obligation along with the 
sales agreement is assigned to the relocation company and may, upon 
payment of the obligation by the relocation company, constitute income 
to the employee. (See Sec. 302-12.7 entitled ``Income tax consequences 
of using relocation companies.'')
    (2) For employees transferred on or after October 12, 1984. Expenses 
paid by a relocation company providing relocation services to the 
transferred employee pursuant to a contract with the employing agency to 
the extent such payments constitute income to the employee. (See 
Sec. 302-12.7.)

    Note: See reference shown in parentheses for reimbursement 
provisions for each allowance listed in paragraphs (a) through (i) of 
this section. See section 217 of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) and 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Publication 521 entitled ``Moving 
Expenses'' and appropriate State and local tax authority publications 
for additional information on the taxability of moving expense 
reimbursements and the allowable tax deductions for moving expenses.

[54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-11.4  Exclusions from coverage.

    The provisions of this part are not applicable to the following:
    (a) Any tax liability that may result from payments by the 
Government to relocation companies on behalf of employees transferred on 
or after November 14, 1983, through October 11, 1984, other than the 
payments for those expenses specified in Sec. 302-11.3(i)(1).
    (b) Any tax liability incurred for local income taxes other than 
city income tax as a result of moving expense reimbursements for 
employees transferred on or after November 14, 1983, through October 11, 
1984. (See definition in Sec. 302-11.5(b).)
    (c) Any tax liability resulting from reimbursed expenses for any 
nontemporary storage of household goods except as specifically provided 
for in Sec. 302-11.3(c).
    (d) Any tax liability resulting from paid or reimbursed expenses for 
shipment of a privately owned automobile.
    (e) Any tax liability resulting from an excess of reimbursed amounts 
over the actual expense paid or incurred. For instance, if an employee's 
reimbursement for the movement of household goods is based on the 
commuted

[[Page 182]]

rate schedule and his/her actual moving expenses are less than the 
reimbursement, the tax liability resulting from the difference is not 
covered by the RIT allowance. (See Sec. 302-11.8(c)(2)(i).)
    (f) Any tax liability resulting from an employee's decision not to 
deduct moving expenses for which a tax deduction is allowable under the 
Internal Revenue Code or appropriate State and local tax codes. (See 
Secs. 302-11.8(b)(1) and 302-11.8(c)(2).)
    (g) Any tax liability resulting from the payment of recruitment, 
retention, or relocation bonuses authorized by the Office of Personnel 
Management pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 5753 and 5754, or any other provisions 
which allow relocation payments that are not reimbursements for travel, 
transportation, and other expenses incurred in relocation.

[54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 17, 56 FR 23658, May 
23, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-11.5  Definitions and discussion of terms.

    For purposes of this part, the following definitions will apply:
    (a) State income tax. A tax, imposed by a State tax authority, that 
is deductible for Federal income tax purposes as a State income tax 
under section 164(a)(3) of the IRC. ``State'' means any one of the 
several States of the United States and the District of Columbia.
    (b) Local income tax. A tax, imposed by a recognized city or county 
tax authority, that is deductible for Federal income tax purposes as a 
local (city or county) income tax under section 164(a)(3) of the IRC; 
except, that for employees transferred on or after November 14, 1983, 
through October 11, 1984, local income tax shall be construed to mean 
only city income tax. For purposes of this regulation:
    (1) City means any unit of general local government which is 
classified as a municipality by the Bureau of the Census, or which is a 
town or township that in the determination of the Secretary of the 
Treasury possesses powers and performs functions comparable to those 
associated with municipalities, is closely settled, and contains within 
its boundaries no incorporated places as defined by the Bureau of the 
Census (31 CFR 215.2(b)(1)).
    (2) County means any unit of local general government which is 
classified as a county by the Bureau of the Census (31 CFR 215.2(e)).
    (c) Covered moving expense reimbursements or covered reimbursements. 
As used herein, these terms include those moving expenses listed in 
Sec. 302-11.3 as being covered by the RIT allowance and which may be 
furnished in kind, or for which reimbursement or an allowance is 
provided by the Government.
    (d) Covered taxable reimbursements. Covered moving expense 
reimbursements minus the tax deductions allowable under the IRC and IRS 
regulations for moving expenses. (See determination in Sec. 302-
11.8(c).)
    (e) Year 1 or reimbursement year. The calendar year in which 
reimbursement or payment for moving expenses is made to, or for, the 
employee under the provisions of this part. All or part of these 
reimbursements (see Sec. 302-11.6) are reported to the IRS as income 
(wages, salary, or other compensation) to the employee for that tax year 
under the provisions of the IRC and IRS regulations, and are subject to 
Federal tax withholding. The withholding tax allowance (WTA) (see 
paragraph (f)(1) of this section) is calculated in Year 1, to cover the 
employee's Federal tax withholding obligations each time covered moving 
expense reimbursements are made that result in a Federal tax withholding 
obligation. For purposes of this part, an advance of funds for any of 
the covered moving expenses is not considered to be a reimbursement or a 
payment until the travel voucher settlement for such expenses takes 
place. If an employee's reimbursement for moving expenses is spread over 
more than one year, he/she will have more than one Year 1.
    (f) Year 2. The calendar year in which a claim for the RIT allowance 
is paid.
    (1) Generally, Year 2 will be the calendar year immediately 
following Year 1 and in which the employee files a tax return reflecting 
his/her tax liability for income received in Year 1. However, there may 
be instances where the employee's claims submission and/or payment of 
the RIT allowance is delayed beyond the calendar year immediately

[[Page 183]]

following Year 1. (Year 1 will always be the calendar year that 
reimbursements are received; see paragraph (e) of this section.) Year 2 
will be the calendar year in which the RIT allowance is actually paid.
    (2) The RIT allowance is calculated in Year 2 and paid to cover the 
additional tax liability (resulting from moving expense reimbursements 
received in Year 1) not covered by the WTA paid in Year 1. If an 
employee's covered taxable reimbursements are spread over more than one 
year, he/she will have more than one Year 2.
    (g) Federal withholding tax rate (FWTR). The tax rate applied to 
incremental income to determine the amount to be withheld for Federal 
income tax from salary or other compensation such as moving expense 
reimbursements. Because moving expense reimbursements constitute 
supplemental wages for Federal income tax purposes, the 20 percent flat 
rate of withholding is generally applicable to such reimbursements. (See 
Sec. 302-11.7(c).) Agencies should refer to the Treasury Financial 
Manual, TFM 3-5000, and applicable IRS regulations for complete and up-
to-date information on this subject.
    (h) Earned income. For purposes of the RIT allowance, ``earned 
income'' shall include only the gross compensation (salary, wages, or 
other compensation such as reimbursement for moving expenses and the 
related WTA (see paragraph (n) of this section) and any RIT allowance 
(see paragraph (m) of this section) paid for moving expense 
reimbursement in a prior year) that is reported as income on IRS Form W-
2 for the employee (employee and spouse, if filing jointly), and if 
applicable, the net earnings (or loss) for self-employment income shown 
on Schedule SE of the IRS Form 1040. Earned income may be from more than 
one source. (See Sec. 302-11.8(d).)
    (i) Marginal tax rate (MTR). The tax rate (for example, 33 percent) 
applicable to a specific increment of income. The Federal, Puerto Rico, 
and State marginal tax rates to be used in calculating the RIT allowance 
are provided in appendices A through D of this part. (See Sec. 302-
11.8(e)(3) of this part for instructions on local marginal tax rate 
determinations.)
    (j) Combined marginal tax rate (CMTR). A single rate determined by 
combining the applicable marginal tax rates for Federal (or Puerto Rico, 
when applicable), State, and local income taxes, using formulas provided 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(5).
    (k) Gross-up. Payment for the estimated additional income tax 
liability incurred by an employee as a result of reimbursements or 
payments by the Government for the covered moving expenses listed in 
Sec. 302-11.3.
    (l) Gross-up formulas. The formulas used to determine the amount of 
the gross-up for the WTA and the RIT allowance. The gross-up formulas 
used herein compensate the employee for the initial tax, the tax on tax, 
etc. Note that the WTA gross-up formula in Sec. 302-11.7(d) is different 
than the RIT gross-up formula prescribed in Sec. 302-11.8(f).
    (m) RIT allowance. The amount of payment computed and paid in Year 2 
to cover substantially all of the estimated additional tax liability 
incurred as a result of the covered moving expense reimbursements 
received in Year 1.
    (n) Withholding tax allowance (WTA). The withholding tax allowance 
(WTA), paid in Year 1, covers the employee's Federal income tax 
withholding liability on covered taxable reimbursements received in Year 
1. The amount is computed by applying the withholding gross-up formula 
prescribed in Sec. 302-11.7(d) (using the Federal withholding tax rate) 
each time that a Federal withholding obligation is incurred on covered 
moving expense reimbursements received in Year 1. Grossing-up the 
Federal withholding amount protects the employee from using part of his/
her moving expense reimbursement to pay Federal withholding taxes. (See 
Sec. 302-11.7.)
    (o) State gross-up. Payment for the estimated additional State 
income tax liability incurred by an employee as a result of 
reimbursements or payments by the Government for the covered moving 
expenses listed in Sec. 302-11.3 that are deductible for Federal income 
tax but not for State income tax purposes.

[[Page 184]]

    (p) State gross-up formula. The formula prescribed in Sec. 302-
11.8(f)(3) to be used in determining the amount to be included in the 
RIT allowance to compensate an employee for the additional State income 
tax incurred in States that do not allow the deduction of moving 
expenses.

[54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 14, 56 FR 9290, Mar. 
6, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 30, 58 FR 
15437, Mar. 23, 1993; FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58244, Oct. 29, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 302-11.6  Procedures in general.

    (a) This regulation sets forth procedures for the computation and 
payment of the RIT allowance and defines agency and employee 
responsibilities. This part does not require changes to those internal 
fiscal procedures established by the individual agencies pursuant to IRS 
regulations, or the Treasury Financial Manual, provided that the intent 
of the statute authorizing the RIT allowance and this part are not 
disturbed.
    (b) The total amount reimbursed or paid to the employee, or on his/
her behalf, for travel, transportation, and other relocation expenses 
and allowances is includable in the employee's gross income pursuant to 
the IRC and certain State or local government tax codes. Some moving 
expenses for which reimbursements are received may be deducted from 
income by the employee as moving expense deductions, subject to certain 
limitations prescribed by the IRS or pertinent State or local tax 
authorities. Reimbursements for nondeductible moving expenses are 
subject to income tax. (See IRS Publication 521 entitled ``Moving 
Expenses'' and the appropriate State and local tax codes for detailed 
information.)
    (c) Usually, if the employee is reimbursed for nondeductible moving 
expenses, the amount of these reimbursements is subject to withholding 
of Federal income tax in accordance with IRS regulations at the time of 
reimbursement. Under existing fiscal procedures, the amount of the 
employee's withholding obligation is usually deducted either from 
reimbursements for the moving expenses at the time of reimbursement or 
from the employee's salary. (See Treasury Financial Manual.)
    (d) Payment of a WTA established herein will offset deductions for 
the Federal income tax withholding on moving expense reimbursements, and 
on the WTA itself, from the employee's moving expense reimbursements or 
from salary.
    (e) The total amount of the RIT allowance can be computed after the 
end of Year 1 as soon as the earned income level, income tax filing 
status, total covered taxable reimbursements, and the applicable 
marginal tax rates can be determined. Employee claims for the RIT 
allowance should be submitted in accordance with this part and the 
employing agency's procedures.
    (f) Procedures are prescribed in Secs. 302-11.7 and 302-11.8 for 
computation and payment of the WTA and the RIT allowance. These 
procedures are built on existing fiscal procedures and IRS regulations 
regarding reporting of employee income from reimbursements and 
withholding of taxes on supplemental wages.

[54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-11.7  Procedures for determining the WTA in Year 1.

    (a) General rules. The WTA is designed to cover only the employee's 
withholding tax obligation for Federal income taxes on income resulting 
from covered moving expense reimbursements. (See definition in Sec. 302-
11.5(c).) Other withholding tax obligations, if any, such as for social 
security taxes or for State and/or local income taxes on income 
resulting from moving expense reimbursements shall not be included in 
the calculation of the WTA payment. The amount of the WTA is equal to 
the Federal income tax withholding obligation incurred by the employee 
on covered moving expense reimbursements (which are not offset by 
deductible moving expenses) and on the WTA itself. Each time covered 
moving expense reimbursements are paid to or on behalf of the employee, 
the WTA shall be calculated, accounted for, and reported as provided in 
paragraphs (b) through (g) of this section.
    (b) Determination of amount of reimbursement subject to withholding. 
Under IRS regulations, income resulting from reimbursements for 
nondeductible

[[Page 185]]

moving expenses is subject to withholding of Federal income taxes. (See 
IRS Publication 521, ``Moving Expenses.'') There are some moving 
expenses which may be reimbursed but are not covered taxable 
reimbursements (see definition in Sec. 302-11.5(d)) for purposes of the 
WTA and RIT allowance calculations, such as nontemporary storage of 
household goods. (See exclusions in Sec. 302-11.4.) Therefore, the 
actual amount of the covered taxable reimbursements may be different 
than the amount of nondeductible moving expenses subject to Federal 
income tax withholding. The difference in these amounts should not be 
substantial; therefore, the amount of nondeductible moving expenses 
subject to Federal income tax withholding, as determined by the agency 
pursuant to IRS regulations, may be used in calculating the WTA. (Note 
that the RIT calculation procedure in Sec. 302-11.8 requires 
determination of covered taxable reimbursements.)
    (c) Determination of Federal withholding tax rate (FWTR). Moving 
expense reimbursements constitute supplemental wages for Federal income 
tax purposes. Therefore, an agency must withhold at the withholding rate 
applicable to supplemental wages. Currently, the supplemental wages 
withholding rate is 28 percent. The supplemental wages withholding rate 
should be used in calculating the WTA unless under an agency's 
withholding procedures a different withholding rate is used pursuant to 
IRS tax regulations. In such cases, the applicable withholding rate 
shall be substituted for the supplemental wages withholding rate in the 
calculation shown in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (d) Calculation of the WTA. The WTA is calculated by substituting 
the amounts determined in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section into 
the following WTA gross-up formula:

    Formula:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.022
    
    Where:
    Y = WTA
    X = FWTR (generally, 28 percent)
    N = nondeductible moving expenses/covered taxable reimbursements
    Example:
    If:
    X = 28 percent
    N = $20,000
    Then:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR97.023
    
    Y = .3889($20,000)
    Y = $7778.00

    (e) WTA payment and employee agreement for repayment. (1) The WTA 
may be calculated several times within Year 1 if reimbursements for 
moving expenses are made on more than one travel voucher. Each time an 
employee is reimbursed for moving expenses which are subject to Federal 
tax withholding in accordance with the IRS regulations, the WTA will be 
calculated and paid unless the employee fails to comply with the 
requirements in paragraph (e)(2) of this section.
    (2) The employee shall be required to agree in writing to repay any 
excess amount paid to him/her in Year 1 (see Secs. 302-11.8(f)(5) and 
302-11.9(b)(3)), and submit the required certified tax information and 
claim for his/her RIT allowance within a reasonable length of time (as 
determined by the agency) after the close of Year 1. Failure of the 
employee to comply with this requirement will preclude the agency's 
payment of the WTA. The entire WTA will be considered an excess payment 
if the RIT allowance claim is not submitted in a timely manner to settle 
the RIT allowance account.
    (f) Determination of employee's withholding tax on WTA. Since the 
amount of the WTA is considered income to the employee, it is subject to 
the same tax withholding requirements as all other moving expense 
reimbursements. (See Treasury Financial Manual, Section 4080, Moving 
Expense Reimbursements, for withholding requirements.)
    (g) End of year reporting. At the end of the year, agencies 
generally are required to issue IRS Form(s) W-2 for each employee 
showing total gross compensation (including moving expense 
reimbursements) and the applicable amount of Federal taxes withheld. For 
tax reporting purposes, the WTA is to be treated as a moving expense 
reimbursement. The total

[[Page 186]]

amount of the employee's WTA's paid during the year as well as the 
amount of moving expense reimbursements should be included as income on 
the employee's Form W-2. The Federal tax withholding amount applicable 
to the moving expense reimbursements and the WTA should also be included 
on the employee's Form W-2. The amount of the WTA's also will be 
furnished to the employee along with the amount of moving expense 
reimbursements on IRS Form 4782 or another itemized listing provided for 
the employee's use in preparing his/her tax return (see IRS regulations 
for further guidance) and in claiming the RIT allowance as provided in 
Sec. 302-11.8.

[54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 14, 56 FR 9290, Mar. 
6, 1991; FTR Amdt. 58, 62 FR 10709, Mar. 10, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 302-11.8  Rules and procedures for determining the RIT allowance in Year 2.

    (a) Summary/overview of procedures. The RIT allowance will be 
calculated and claimed in Year 2. This can be accomplished as soon as 
the employee can determine earned income (as defined herein), income tax 
filing status, covered taxable reimbursements for Year 1, and the 
applicable marginal tax rates. The RIT allowance is then calculated 
using the gross-up formula under procedures prescribed herein. Since the 
RIT allowance is considered income, appropriate withholding taxes on the 
RIT allowance are deducted and the balance constitutes the net payment 
to the employee. Rules, procedures, and the prescribed tax tables for 
these calculations are provided in paragraphs (b) through (g) of this 
section, and in appendices A, B, and C of this part.
    (b) General rules and assumptions. (1) The procedures prescribed 
herein for calculations and payment of the RIT allowance are based on 
certain assumptions jointly developed by GSA and IRS, and tax tables 
developed by IRS. This approach avoids a potentially controversial and 
administratively burdensome procedure requiring the employee to furnish 
extensive documentation, such as certified copies of actual tax returns 
and reconstructed returns, in support of a claim for a RIT allowance 
payment. Specifically, the following assumptions have been made:
    (i) The employee will claim allowable moving expense deductions for 
the same tax year in which the corresponding moving expense 
reimbursements are included in income;
    (ii) Changes to the IRC, applicable to the 1987 and subsequent tax 
years, require that allowable moving expense deductions must be taken as 
an itemized deduction from gross income rather than as an adjustment to 
gross income as in previous tax years. It is assumed that employees will 
receive the benefit of allowable moving expense deductions to offset 
income either by itemizing their moving expense deductions or through 
the increased standard deductions.
    (iii) Prior to the Tax Reform Act of 1986, it was assumed that the 
employee's (and spouse's, if a joint return is filed) earned income, 
filing status, and CMTR determined for Year 1 (and used in determining 
the RIT allowance in Year 2) would remain the same or would not be 
substantially different in the second and subsequent tax years. However, 
the Tax Reform Act of 1986 substantially changed the Federal tax 
structure making it necessary to compute a separate CMTR for Year 1 and 
for Year 2. (See paragraph (e) of this section.) The formula for 
calculating the RIT allowance to be paid in 1988 and subsequent years is 
shown in paragraph (f) of this section. It is assumed that within the 
accuracy of the calculation, the State and local tax rates for Year 1 
and Year 2 will remain the same or will not be substantially different. 
Therefore, the State and local tax rates for Year 1 shall be used in 
calculating the CMTR for Year 2.
    (2) The prescribed procedures, which yield an estimate of an 
employee's additional tax liability due to moving expense 
reimbursements, are to be used uniformly. They are not to be adjusted to 
accommodate an employee's unique circumstance which may differ from the 
assumed circumstances stated in paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (3) An adjustment of the RIT allowance paid in Year 2 for the 
covered taxable reimbursements received in Year 1 is required if the tax 
information certified to on the RIT allowance claim is

[[Page 187]]

different than that shown on the actual Federal tax return filed with 
IRS for Year 1 or changed for any reason after filing of the tax return, 
so as to affect the CMTR's used in the RIT allowance calculation. (See 
Sec. 302-11.10 for claims procedures.)
    (c) Determination of covered taxable reimbursements. (1) Generally, 
the amount of the covered taxable reimbursements is the difference 
between (i) the amount of covered moving expense reimbursements for the 
allowances listed in Sec. 302-11.3 that was included in the employee's 
income in Year 1, and (ii) the maximum amount of allowable moving 
expenses that may be claimed as a moving expense deduction by the 
employee on his/her Federal tax return under IRS tax regulations to 
offset the income resulting from moving expense reimbursements for Year 
1. The covered taxable reimbursements will be determined as if the 
employee had itemized and deducted all allowable moving expense 
deductions. (See assumption made in paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this 
section.) If the employee is precluded from claiming moving expense 
deductions because he/she does not meet IRS requirements for the 
distance test, then the amount of covered taxable reimbursements is the 
same as the amount of covered moving expense reimbursements. (See 
Sec. 302-11.5(d).)
    (2) For purposes of calculating the RIT allowance, the following 
special rules apply to the determination of moving expense deductions to 
offset moving expense reimbursements reported as income:
    (i) The total amount of reimbursement (which was reported as income) 
for the expenses of en route travel for the employee and family (see 
Sec. 302-11.3(a)) and transportation (including up to 30 days temporary 
storage) of household goods (see Sec. 302-11.3(b)) to the new official 
station shall be used as a moving expense deduction. (See also Sec. 302-
11.4 (e) and (f).)
    (ii) The total amount of reimbursement for a househunting trip, 
temporary quarters (up to 30 days at new station) and real estate 
transaction expenses (see Sec. 302-11.3 (e), (f), (g), and (i)), up to 
the maximum allowable deduction under IRS tax regulations, shall be used 
as a moving expense deduction. For example, an employee and spouse 
filing a joint return and residing in the same household at the end of 
the tax year may deduct up to $3,000 for these expenses. (No more than 
$1,500 of the $3,000 may be claimed for a househunting trip and 
temporary quarters expenses combined.) If the employee was reimbursed 
$1,350 for a househunting trip and temporary quarters expenses and 
$9,000 for real estate expenses, the moving expense deductions would be 
$1,350 for the househunting trip and temporary quarters expenses and 
$1,650 for real estate expenses. If the employee's reimbursement was 
$1,850 for the househunting trip and temporary quarters expenses and 
$9,000 for real estate expenses, the moving expense deductions would be 
$1,500 for the househunting trip and temporary quarters expenses and 
$1,500 for real estate expenses. If the employee had no reimbursement 
for a househunting trip and temporary quarters, the full $3,000 would be 
applied to the $9,000 reimbursement for real estate expenses. (See IRS 
Publication 521, ``Moving Expenses,'' for these and other maximums which 
vary by situation and filing status.)
    (3) Procedures and examples are provided herein as if all moving 
expense reimbursements are received in one year with all moving expense 
deductions applied in that same year to arrive at the covered taxable 
reimbursements. However, when reimbursements span more than one year, 
the amount of covered taxable reimbursements must be determined 
separately for each reimbursement year (Year 1). The maximum moving 
expense deductions apply to the entire move. Under IRS tax regulations, 
the employee has some discretion as to when he/she claims these 
deductions (e.g., in the year of the move when the expense was paid or 
in the year of reimbusement, if these actions do not occur in the same 
year). However, for purposes of the RIT allowance procedures, the moving 
expense deductions will be applied in the year that the corresponding 
reimbursement is made. For example, if an employee incurred and was 
reimbursed $1,000 for a househunting trip and temporary quarters in 1989 
and an additional $1,000

[[Page 188]]

for temporary quarters in 1990, this employee, according to his/her 
particular situation and tax filing status, may deduct $1,500 of these 
expenses in moving expense deductions. In calculating the RIT allowance 
for 1989, $1,000 of the $1,500 deduction is used to offset the $1,000 
reimbursement in 1989 resulting in zero covered taxable reimbursements 
for the househunting trip and temporary quarters for 1989. The remaining 
$500 (balance of the $1,500 not used in determining covered taxable 
reimbursements for 1989) will be used to offset the $1,000 temporary 
quarters reimbursement in 1990 (second Year 1), leaving $500 of the 
temporary quarters reimbursement as a covered taxable reimbursement for 
1990.
    (4) Although the WTA amount is included in income (see Sec. 302-
11.7), it shall not be included in the amount of covered taxable 
reimbursements. Under the procedures and formulas established herein, 
the proper amount of the RIT allowance is calculated using the RIT 
gross-up formula with the WTA and any prior RIT allowance payments 
excluded from covered taxable reimbursements.
    (5) Agencies are cautioned that there may be moving expenses 
reimbursed to the employee that are not covered by the RIT allowance. 
(See exclusions in Sec. 302-11.4; also see discussion in Sec. 302-11.7 
regarding covered taxable reimbursements versus nondeductible expenses.)
    (d) Determination of income level and filing status. In order to 
determine the CMTR's needed to calculate the RIT allowance, the employee 
must determine the appropriate amount of earned income (as prescribed 
herein) that was or will be reported on his/her Federal tax return for 
the tax year in which the covered taxable reimbursements were received 
(Year 1). Such amount will also include the spouse's earned income if a 
joint filing status is claimed. For purposes of this regulation, 
appropriate earned income shall include only the amount of gross 
compensation reported on IRS Form(s) W-2, and, if applicable, the net 
earnings (or loss) from self-employment income as shown on Schedule SE 
of IRS Form 1040. (See Sec. 302-11.5(h).) (Note that moving expense 
reimbursements including the WTA amounts and any RIT allowance paid for 
a prior Year 1 are to be included in earned income and should be shown 
as income on the Form W-2; if they are not, other appropriate 
documentation shall be furnished by the agency.) (See Sec. 302-11.7(g).) 
The amount of earned income as determined under this paragraph and the 
tax filing status (for example, from lines 1 through 5 on the 1987 IRS 
Form 1040) shall be contained in a certified statement on, or attached 
to, the voucher claiming the RIT allowance. (See Sec. 302-11.10.) If a 
joint filing status is claimed and the spouse's earned income is 
included, the spouse must sign the certified statement. If the spouse 
does not sign the statement, earned income will include only the 
employee's earned income and the RIT allowance will be calculated on 
that basis. This condition will not apply if an employee is allowed, 
under IRS rules, to file a joint return as a surviving spouse.
    (e) Determination of the CMTR's. The gross-up formula used to 
calculate the RIT allowance in paragraph (f) of this section, requires 
the use of two CMTR's--one for Year 1 in which reimbursements were 
received and the other for Year 2 in which the RIT allowance is paid. 
CMTR's are single tax rates calculated to represent the Federal, State, 
and/or local income tax rates applicable to the earned income determined 
for Year 1. (See paragraph (d) of this section.) The CMTR's will be 
determined as follows:
    (1) Federal marginal tax rates. The Federal marginal tax rates for 
Year 1 and Year 2 are determined by using the income level and filing 
status determined under paragraph (d) of this section and contained in 
the certified statement by the employee (or employee and spouse) on the 
RIT allowance claim, and applying the prescribed Federal tax tables 
contained in appendices A and C of this part. For example, if the income 
level for the 1989 tax year (Year 1) was $84,100 for a married employee 
filing a Federal joint return, the Federal marginal tax rate would be 33 
percent for Year 1 (1989) (see appendix A of this part) and 28 percent 
for Year 2 (1990) (see appendix C of this part). These rates would be 
used regardless of how much of the $84,100

[[Page 189]]

was attributable to reimbursement for the employee's relocation 
expenses.

    Note: These marginal rates are different from the withholding tax 
rate used for WTA.

If the employee incurs only Federal income tax (i.e., there are no State 
or local taxes), the Federal marginal tax rates determined from 
appendices A and C of this part are the CMTR's to be used in the RIT 
gross-up formula provided in Sec. 302-11.8(f). In such cases, the 
provisions of paragraphs (e) (2) and (3) of this section do not apply.
    (2) State marginal tax rate. (i) If the employee incurs an 
additional State income tax (see definition in Sec. 302-11.5(a)) 
liability as a result of moving expense reimbursements, the appropriate 
State tax table in appendix B of this part is to be used to determine 
the applicable State marginal tax rate that will be substituted into the 
formula for determining the CMTR for both Year 1 and Year 2. The 
appropriate State tax table will be the one that corresponds to the tax 
year in which the reimbursements are paid to the employee (Year 1). The 
income level determined in paragraph (d) of this section for Federal 
taxes shall be used to identify the appropriate income bracket in the 
State tax table. The applicable State marginal tax rate is obtained from 
the selected income bracket column for the State where the employee is 
required to pay State income tax on moving expense reimbursements. The 
tax rates shown in the table apply to all employees regardless of their 
filing status, except where a separate rate is shown for a single filing 
status.
    (ii) The lowest income bracket shown in the State tax tables in 
appendix B of this part is $20,000-$24,999. In cases where the 
employee's (employee's and spouse's, if filing jointly) earned income as 
determined under paragraph (d) of this section is less than this income 
bracket, an appropriate State marginal tax rate shall be established by 
the employing agency from the applicable State tax code or regulations 
issued pursuant thereto. Such State marginal tax rate shall be 
representative of the earned income level in question but in no case 
more than the marginal tax rate established in appendix B of this part 
for the $20,000-$24,999 income bracket for the particular State in which 
an additional tax obligation has been incurred.
    (iii) The prescribed State marginal tax rates generally are 
expressed as a percent of taxable income. However, if the applicable 
State marginal tax rate is stated as a percentage of the Federal income 
tax liability, the State tax rate must be converted to a percent of 
taxable income to be used in the CMTR formulas in paragraph (e)(5) of 
this section. This is accomplished by multiplying the applicable Federal 
tax rate for Year 1 by the applicable State tax rate. For example, if 
the Federal tax rate is 33 percent for Year 1 and the State tax rate is 
25 percent of the Federal income tax liability, the State tax rate 
stated as a percent of taxable income would be 8.25 percent. The State 
tax rate thus determined for Year 1 will be used in determining the CMTR 
for both Year 1 and Year 2.
    (iv) An employee may incur a State income tax liability on moving 
expense reimbursements in more than one State at the same or different 
marginal tax rates (i.e., double taxation). For example, an employee may 
incur taxes on moving expense reimbursements in one State because of 
residency in that State, and in another State because that particular 
State taxes income earned within its jurisdiction irrespective of 
whether the employee is a resident. In such cases, a single State 
marginal tax rate must be determined for use in the CMTR formulas in 
paragraph (e)(5) of this section. The general rules in paragraph 
(e)(2)(iv) (A) through (C) of this section apply in determining the 
applicable single State marginal tax rate in such cases.

    (A) If two or more States impose an income tax on an employee's 
moving expense reimbursement, but no two States tax the same portion of 
the reimbursement, then the reimbursement is not subject to double 
taxation. In this situation, the average of the applicable State 
marginal tax rates, as determined under paragraphs (e)(2) (i) through 
(iii) of this section, shall be treated as being imposed on the entire 
reimbursement, and shall be used in the CMTR formula.


[[Page 190]]


    (B) If two or more States impose an income tax on the moving expense 
reimbursement, and more than one State taxes the same portion of the 
reimbursement, but those States allow an adjustment or credit for income 
taxes paid to the other State(s), then the reimbursement is not subject 
to double taxation. In this situation, the highest of the applicable 
State marginal tax rates, as determined under paragraphs (e)(2) (i) 
through (iii) of this section, shall be used in the CMTR formula.

    (C) If two or more States impose an income tax on the moving expense 
reimbursement, and more than one State taxes the same portion of the 
reimbursement without allowing an adjustment or credit for income taxes 
paid to the other, then the reimbursement is subject to double taxation. 
In this situation, the sum of the applicable State marginal tax rates, 
as determined under paragraphs (e)(2) (i) through (iii) of this section, 
shall be used in the CMTR formula.
    (3) Local marginal tax rate. Because of the impracticality of 
establishing a single marginal tax rate table for local income taxes 
that could be applied uniformly on a nationwide basis, appropriate local 
marginal tax rates shall be determined as provided in paragraphs (e)(3) 
(i) through (iii) of this section.
    (i) If the employee incurs an additional local income tax (see 
definition Sec. 302-11.5(b)) liability as a result of moving expense 
reimbursements, he/she shall certify to such fact when claiming the RIT 
allowance (see certification statement in Sec. 302-11.10) by specifying 
the name of the locality imposing the income tax and the applicable 
marginal tax rate determined from the actual marginal tax rate table or 
schedule prescribed by the taxing locality. The marginal tax rate shall 
be the one applicable to the taxable income portion of the amount of 
earned income determined under paragraph (d) of this section for the 
employee (and spouse, if filing jointly). The same tax rate shall be 
used in calculating the CMTR for both Year 1 and Year 2. The employing 
agency shall establish procedures to determine whether the employee-
certified local marginal tax rate is appropriate for the employee's 
income level and filing status and approve its use in the CMTR formulas. 
(See also Sec. 302-11.10(b)(2).)
    (ii) If the local marginal tax rate is stated as a percentage of 
Federal or State income tax liability, such rate must be converted to a 
percent of taxable income for use in the CMTR formulas. This is 
accomplished by multiplying the applicable Federal or State tax rate for 
Year 1 as determined in paragraph (e) (1) or (2) of this section by the 
applicable local tax rate. For example, if the State tax rate for Year 1 
is 6 percent and the local tax rate is 50 percent of State income tax 
liability, the local tax rate stated as a percentage of taxable income 
would be 3 percent. The local tax rate thus determined for Year 1 will 
be used in determining the CMTR for both Year 1 and Year 2.
    (iii) The situations described in paragraph (e)(2)(iv) of this 
section with respect to State income taxes may also be encountered with 
local income taxes. If such situations do occur, the rules prescribed 
for determining the single State marginal tax rate shall also be applied 
to determine the single local marginal tax rate for use in the CMTR 
formulas.
    (4) Marginal tax rates for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the U.S. possessions--
(i) The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. A Federal employee who is relocated 
to or from a point, or between points, in the Commonwealth of Puerto 
Rico may be subject to income tax on the employee's salary (including 
moving expense reimbursements) by both the U.S. Government and the 
government of Puerto Rico. However, under the current law of Puerto 
Rico, such employee receives a credit on his/her Puerto Rico income tax 
for the amount of taxes paid to the United States. The rules in 
paragraphs (e)(4)(i) (A) through (C) apply in determining the marginal 
tax rate applicable for transfers to, from, or between points in Puerto 
Rico.
    (A) The applicable Puerto Rico marginal tax rate shall be determined 
by using the income level determined in paragraph (d) of this section 
for Federal taxes and the employee's filing status. The Puerto Rico 
marginal tax

[[Page 191]]

rate for Year 1 will be used in computing the CMTR for both Year 1 and 
Year 2. The Puerto Rico tax tables are contained in appendix D of this 
part.
    (B) If the applicable Puerto Rico marginal tax rate is higher than 
the applicable Federal marginal tax rate, then the total amount of taxes 
paid by the employee to both jurisdictions is equal to the employee's 
total income tax liability to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico before any 
credit is given for taxes paid to the United States. The Federal 
marginal tax rate, therefore, is of no consequence and will be 
disregarded. In such cases, the formula in paragraph (e)(5)(iii) of this 
section will be used to compute the CMTR. The CMTR formula shall include 
only the Puerto Rico marginal tax rate, the State marginal tax rate as 
determined under paragraph (e)(2) of this section (when applicable), and 
the local marginal tax rate as determined under paragraph (e)(3) of this 
section. For purposes of applying the Puerto Rico CMTR formula in 
paragraph (e)(5)(iii) of this section, the State marginal tax rate will 
be applicable if both Puerto Rico and one or more of the States impose 
an income tax on the moving expense reimbursement, and more than one of 
these entities taxes the same portion of the reimbursement without 
allowing an adjustment or credit for income taxes paid to the other. In 
this situation, the S component of the CMTR formula will be the 
applicable State marginal tax rate as determined under paragraph (e)(2) 
of this section.
    (C) If the applicable Puerto Rico marginal tax rate is equal to or 
lower than the applicable Federal marginal tax rate, then the total 
amount of taxes paid by the employee to both jurisdictions is equal to 
the employee's total Federal income tax liability. The Puerto Rico 
marginal tax rate, therefore, is of no consequence in such cases and 
will be disregarded. The CMTR will be computed using the formula in 
paragraphs (e)(5) (i) and (ii) of this section. This formula will 
include the Federal marginal tax rate as determined under paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section, the State marginal tax rate as determined under 
paragraph (e)(2) of this section (when applicable), and the local 
marginal tax rate as determined under paragraph (e)(3) of this section. 
The State marginal tax rate will be applicable if one or more States 
impose tax on the moving expense reimbursement.
    (ii) The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands and the U.S. 
possessions. A Federal employee who is relocated to or from a point, or 
between points, in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands or 
the U.S. possessions (Guam, American Samoa, and the U.S. Virgin Islands) 
is subject to both Federal income tax and income tax assessed by the 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands or the U.S. possession, as 
applicable. However, the income tax system and rates for the 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands and for the U.S. 
possessions are identical to the U.S. Federal income tax system and 
rates. This constitutes a ``mirror tax'' system. A tax credit or 
exclusion is provided by one of the taxing jurisdictions (either the 
U.S., the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or the U.S. 
possession, as appropriate) to prevent double taxation. The marginal tax 
rate for the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands or the U.S. 
possession, therefore, is of no consequence since it is identical to the 
Federal marginal income tax rate and is completely offset by a 
corresponding credit or exclusion. Thus, the Commonwealth's or the 
possession's tax rate will not be factored into the CMTR formula. The 
CMTR will be computed as provided in paragraphs (e)(5) (i) and (ii) 
based solely on the Federal marginal tax rate; when applicable, the 
State(s) marginal tax rate; and the local marginal tax rate.
    (5) Calculation of the CMTR's. As stated above, the gross-up formula 
for calculating the RIT allowance requires the use of two CMTR's. 
However, the required CMTR's cannot be calculated by merely adding the 
Federal, State, and local marginal tax rates together because of the 
deductibility of State and local income taxes from income for Federal 
income tax purposes. The State tax tables prescribed in appendix B of 
this part are designed to use the same income amount as that determined 
for the Federal taxes, which reflects, among other things, State and 
local tax deductions. The formulas prescribed below for calculating the

[[Page 192]]

CMTR's are designed to adjust the State and local tax rates to 
compensate for their deductibility from income for Federal tax purposes.
    (i) Calculation of the CMTR for Year 1. The following formula shall 
be used to calculate the CMTR for Year 1.

CMTR Formula: X = F + (1 - F)S + (1 - F)L

Where:

    X = CMTR for Year 1
    F = Federal tax rate for Year 1
    S = State tax rate for Year 1
    L = Local tax rate for Year 1

    (A) Federal, State, and local taxes incurred. If the employee incurs 
Federal, State, and local income taxes on moving expense reimbursements, 
the CMTR formula may be solved as follows:

Example:

If:

    F=33 percent of income
    S=6 percent of income
    L=3 percent of income

Then:

    X=.33+(1.00-.33).06+(1.00-.33).03
    X=.3903

    (B) Federal and State income taxes only. If the employee incurs tax 
liability on moving expense reimbursements for Federal and State income 
taxes but none for local income tax, the value of ``L'' is zero and the 
CMTR formula may be solved as follows:

Example:

If:

    F=33 percent of income
    S=6 percent of income
    L=Zero

Then:

    X=.33+(1.00-.33).06
    X=.3702

    (C) Federal and local income taxes only. If the employee incurs a 
tax liability on moving expense reimbursements for Federal and local 
income taxes but none for State income tax, the value of ``S'' is zero 
and the CMTR formula may be solved as follows:

Example:

If:

    F=33 percent of income
    S=Zero
    L=3 percent of income

Then:

    X=.33+(1.00-.33).03
    X=.3501

    (ii) Calculation of the CMTR for Year 2. The calculation of the CMTR 
for Year 2 is the same as described for Year 1, except that the Federal 
tax rate for Year 2 is used in place of the Federal tax rate for Year 1. 
State and local tax rates remain the same as for Year 1. The following 
formula shall be used to determine the CMTR for Year 2:

CMTR Formula: W=F+(1-F)S+(1-F)L

Where:

    W=CMTR for Year 2
    F=Federal tax rate for Year 2
    S=State tax rate for Year 1
    L=local tax rate for Year 1

    (iii) Calculation of CMTR's for Puerto Rico. The following formula 
shall be used to calculate the CMTR for transfers to, from, or between 
points in Puerto Rico. (This formula is different from the formulas 
provided in paragraphs (e)(5) (i) and (ii) of this section since the 
Federal marginal tax rate is disregarded.)

    CMTR Formula: X = P + S + L

    Where:

    X = CMTR for Year 1 and Year 2
    P = Puerto Rico tax rate for Year 1
    S = State tax rate for Year 1, when applicable (See Sec. 302-
11.8(e)(4)(i)(B).)
    L = Local tax rate for Year 1
    (f) Determination of the RIT allowance. The RIT allowance to cover 
the tax liability on additional income resulting from the covered 
taxable reimbursements received in Year 1 is calculated in Year 2 as 
provided below:
    (1) The RIT allowance is calculated by substituting the amount of 
covered taxable reimbursements for Year 1, the CMTR's for Year 1 and 
Year 2, and the total amount of the WTA's paid in Year 1 into the gross-
up formula as follows:

                                                                        
                         X                             1-X              
    Z         =    ------------    (R)        -    -----------    (Y)   
                        1-W                            1-W              
  ......                                                                

Where:

    Z=RIT allowance payable in Year 2
    X=CMTR for Year 1
    W=CMTR for Year 2
    R=covered taxable reimbursements

[[Page 193]]

    Y=total WTA's paid in Year 1

Example:

If:

    X=.3903
    W=.3448
    R=$21,800
    Y=$5,450

Then:
     

                                                                        
             .3903                             1.00-.3903               
  Z=   -----------------   ($21,800)     -  ----------------   ($5,450) 
           1.00-.3448                          1.00-.3448               
                                                                        

    Z=.5957 ($21,800)-.9306 ($5,450)
    Z=$12,986.26-$5,071.77
    Z=$7,914.49

    (2) There may be instances when a WTA was not paid in Year 1 at the 
time moving expense reimbursements were made. In cases where there is no 
WTA to be deducted, the value of ``Y'' is zero and the formula stated in 
paragraph (f)(1) of this section for calculating the amount of the RIT 
allowance (Z) due the employee in Year 2 may be solved as shown in the 
following example:

Example:

If:

    X=.3903
    W=.3448
    R=$21,800
    Y=Zero

Then:

     

                                                                        
                                     .3903                              
      Z             =      ------------------------       ($21,800)     
                                  1.00-.3448                            
  ..........                                                            


    Z=.5957 ($21,800)
    Z=$12,986.26

    (3) Certain States do not allow the deduction of all or part of the 
covered moving expenses that are deductible for Federal income tax 
purposes. The State gross-up to cover the additional State income tax 
liability resulting from the covered moving expense reimbursements 
received in Year 1 that are deductible for Federal income tax purposes 
but not for State income tax purposes is calculated in Year 2 as 
follows:
    (i) The State gross-up is calculated by substituting the amount of 
covered moving expense reimbursements that are deductible for Federal 
income tax purposes but not for State income tax purposes, the Federal 
tax rate for Year 1, the State tax rate for Year 1, and the combined 
marginal tax rate for Year 2 into the State gross-up formula as follows:

Formula:


                                                                        
                                         S(1-F)                         
                              A = ------------------- N                 
                                          1-W                           
                                                                        

Where:

    A=State gross-up
    F=Federal tax rate for Year 1
    S=State tax rate for Year 1
    W=CMTR for Year 2
    N=covered moving expense reimbursements that are deductible for 
Federal income tax purposes but not for State income tax purposes

Example:

If:

    F=.33
    S=.06
    W=.3448
    N=$9,250

Then:


                                                                        
                                    .06(1-.33)                          
                              A = -------------  $9,250                 
                                     1-.3448                            
                                                                        

    A=.0614 ($9,250)
    A=$567.95

    (ii) Add the State gross-up to the RIT allowance amount as 
calculated using the formula in paragraph (f)(1) of this section. The 
result is the RIT allowance adjusted for those States that do not allow 
moving expense deductions.

Example:


RIT allowance payable in Year 1.............................   $7,914.49
Plus adjustment factor......................................     +567.95
                                                                        
                                                             -----------
    Total...................................................   $8,482.44
                                                                        


    (4) If the amount of the RIT allowance is greater than zero, it is 
payable to the employee on the travel voucher as a relocation or moving 
expense allowance. The RIT allowance amount is included in the 
employee's gross income for Year 2 and, therefore, subject to 
appropriate withholding taxes. (See net payment to employee in paragraph 
(g) of this section.) The RIT allowance amount will be reported on IRS 
Form W-2 for Year 2 (including applicable income tax withholding 
amounts) and on

[[Page 194]]

IRS Form 4782 for the employee's information.
    (5) If the calculation of the RIT allowance results in a negative 
amount, the employee is obligated to repay this amount as a debt due the 
Government. (See Secs. 302-11.7(e)(2) and 302-11.9(b).)
    (6) Any changes to the employee's income level or filing status for 
Year 1 that would affect the marginal tax rates (Federal, State, or 
local) used in calculating the RIT allowance must be reported to the 
agency by the employee as provided in Sec. 302-11.9(b)(2). (See also 
Sec. 302-11.10 for certified statement regarding these changes.)
    (g) Determination of the net payment due employee in Year 2. Since 
the amount of the RIT allowance is income to the employee in Year 2, it 
is subject to the same tax withholding requirements as all other moving 
expense reimbursements. Agencies should determine the appropriate 
amounts for withholding taxes under their internal tax withholding 
procedures. The amount of withholding taxes is deducted from the RIT 
allowance to arrive at the net payment to the employee.

[54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989; 54 FR 23563, June 1, 1989, as amended by FTR 
Amdt. 14, 56 FR 9290, Mar. 6, 1991; 56 FR 12816, Mar. 27, 1991; FTR 
Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 30, 58 FR 15437, Mar. 
23, 1993; FTR Amdt. 37, 59 FR 27490, May 27, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 302-11.9  Responsibilities.

    (a) Agency. Finance offices will calculate the amount of the gross-
up for the WTA in Year 1 in accordance with procedures outlined herein 
and credit this amount to the employee at the time of reimbursement as 
provided in Sec. 302-11.7(e). The WTA will be reflected on the 
employee's Form W-2 for Year 1. The RIT allowance may be calculated in 
Year 2 either by the employee or by the agency finance office based on 
information provided by the employee on the voucher, as directed by the 
agency's implementing policies and procedures. In addition, agencies 
shall prescribe appropriate and necessary implementing procedures as 
provided elsewhere in this part.
    (b) Employee. (1) The employee is required to submit a claim for the 
RIT allowance and to file the tax information for Year 1 specified in 
Sec. 302-11.10 with his/her agency in Year 2, regardless of whether any 
additional reimbursement for the RIT allowance is owed the employee. 
(See Sec. 302-11.7(e) for employee agreement.)
    (2) If any action occurs (i.e., amended tax return, tax audit, etc.) 
that would change the information provided in Year 2 by the employee to 
his/her agency for use in calculating the RIT allowance due the employee 
for Year 1 taxes, this information must be provided by the employee to 
his/her agency under procedures prescribed by the agency. (See Sec. 302-
11.10.)
    (3) If the calculation of the RIT allowance results in a negative 
amount, the employee is obligated to repay this amount as a debt due the 
Government. (See Secs. 302-11.7(e)(2) and 302-11.8(f)(5).)

[54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 14, 56 FR 9292, Mar. 
6, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 302-11.10  Claims for payment and supporting documentation and verification.

    (a) Claims forms. Claims for payment of the RIT allowance shall be 
submitted by the employee in Year 2 on SF 1012 (Travel Voucher) or other 
authorized travel voucher form. When claiming payment for the RIT 
allowance, the employee shall furnish and certify to certain tax 
information that has been or will be shown on his/her actually prepared 
tax returns. The spouse must also sign statement if joint filing status 
is claimed and spouse's income is included on statement. This 
information shall be contained in a certified statement on, or attached 
to, the SF 1012 reading essentially as follows:

                           Certified Statement

    I certify that the following information, which is to be used in 
calculating the RIT allowance to which I am entitled, has been (or will 
be) shown on the income tax returns filed (or to be filed) by me (or by 
my spouse and me) with the applicable Federal, State, and local (specify 
which) tax authorities for the 19____ tax year.
--Gross compensation as shown on attached IRS Form(s) W-2 and, if 
applicable, net earnings (or loss) from self-employment income shown on 
attached Schedule SE (Form 1040):

[[Page 195]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Form(s) W-2   Schedule SE
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Employee....................................   $__________   $__________
Spouse (if filing jointly)\1\...............   $__________   $__________
    Total (Both columns)....................  ............   $__________
------------------------------------------------------------------------

--Filing status:________________________________________________________
(Specify one of the filing status items that was (or will be) claimed on 
IRS Form 1040.)
--Marginal tax rates from appendices A, B, and C of 41 CFR part 302-11 
and local tax tables derived under procedures prescribed in 41 CFR part 
302-11:

Federal for Year 1______________________________________________________

Federal for Year 2______________________________________________________

State (specify which):__________________________________________________

Local (specify which):__________________________________________________

    The above information is true and accurate to the best of my 
knowledge. I (we) agree to notify the appropriate agency official of any 
changes to the above (i.e., from amended tax returns, tax audit, etc.) 
so that appropriate adjustments to the RIT allowance can be made. The 
required supporting documents are attached. Additional documentation 
will be furnished if requested.
    I (we) further agree that if the 12-month service agreement required 
by 41 CFR 302-1.5 is violated, the total amount of the RIT allowance 
will become a debt due the United States Government and will be repaid 
according to agency procedures.
_______________________________________________________________________
Employee's signature

Date____________________________________________________________________

_______________________________________________________________________
Spouse's signature (if filing jointly)\1\

Date____________________________________________________________________

    \1\ If a joint filing status is claimed and spouse's income is 
included, the spouse must sign the statement. If the spouse does not 
sign the document, earned income will include only the employee's earned 
income as provided in 41 CFR 302-11.8(d). This condition will not apply 
if an employee is allowed, under IRS rules, to file a joint return as a 
surviving spouse.

    (b) Supporting documentation/verification. The claim for the RIT 
allowance shall be supported by documentation attached to the voucher 
and by verification of State and local tax obligations as provided 
below:
    (1) Copies of the appropriate IRS Forms W-2 and, if applicable, the 
completed IRS Schedule SE (Form 1040) shall be attached to the voucher 
to substantiate the income amounts shown in the certified statement. 
Employee (and spouse, if filing jointly) must agree to provide 
additional documentation to verify income amounts, filing status, and 
State and local income tax obligations if requested by the agency.
    (2) In order to determine or verify whether a particular State or 
local tax authority imposes a tax on moving expense reimbursements, it 
is incumbent upon the appropriate agency officials to become familiar 
with the State and local tax laws that affect their transferring 
employees. In cases where the taxability of moving expense 
reimbursements is not clear, an agency may pay a RIT allowance which 
reflects only those State and local tax obligations that are clearly 
imposed under State and local tax law. Once the questionable State or 
local tax obligations are resolved, agencies may recompute the RIT 
allowance and make appropriate payment adjustments.
    (c) Fraudulent claims. A claim against the United States is 
forfeited if the claimant defrauds or attempts to defraud the Government 
in connection therewith (28 U.S.C. 2514). In addition, there are two 
criminal provisions under which severe penalties may be imposed on an 
employee who knowingly presents a false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim 
against the United States (18 U.S.C. 287 and 1001). The employee's claim 
for payment of the RIT allowance shall accurately reflect the facts 
involved in every instance so that any violation of these provisions 
will be avoided.


<R05>
Sec. 302-11.11  Violation of service agreement.

    In the event the employee violates the terms of the service 
agreement required under Sec. 302-1.5, no part of the RIT allowance or 
the WTA will be paid, and any amounts paid prior to such violation shall 
be a debt due the United States until they are repaid by the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-11.12  Advance of funds.

    No advance of funds is authorized in connection with the allowance 
provided in this part.

[54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, 
June 26, 1992]

[[Page 196]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-11.13  Source references.

    The following references or publications have been used as source 
material for this part.
    (a) Internal Revenue Code (IRC), section 164(a)(3) (26 U.S.C. 
164(a)(3)) pertaining to the deductibility of State and local income 
taxes, and section 217 (26 U.S.C. 217), pertaining to moving expenses.
    (b) Internal Revenue Service Publication 521, ``Moving Expenses.''
    (c) Internal Revenue Service, Circular E, ``Employer's Tax Guide.''
    (d) Department of the Treasury Financial Manual, TFM 3-5000.
    (e) 31 CFR 215.2 (5 U.S.C. 5516, 5517, and 5520).

[54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, 
June 26, 1992]
     Appendix A to Part 302-11--Federal Tax Tables for RIT Allowance

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                             Years 1983/1984

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in Sec. 302-
11.8(e)(1).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
11..............................................................     $3,519     $4,692     $5,742     $7,845     $8,265    $10,356     $4,017     $5,220
12..............................................................      4,692      5,812      7,845      9,830     10,356     12,587      5,220      6,514
14..............................................................      5,812      8,010      9,830     11,979     12,587     17,415      6,514      8,215
15..............................................................      8,010     10,102        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
16..............................................................     10,102     12,586        N/A        N/A     17,415     22,090      8,215     10,524
17..............................................................        N/A        N/A     11,979     15,480        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
18..............................................................     12,586     14,953     15,480     19,216     22,090     26,915     10,524     13,105
20..............................................................     14,953     17,340     19,216     23,330        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
22..............................................................        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A     26,915     32,198     13,105     15,068
23..............................................................     17,340     21,186        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
24..............................................................        N/A        N/A     23,330     29,738        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
25..............................................................        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A     32,198     38,335     15,068     18,748
26..............................................................     21,186     27,362        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
28..............................................................        N/A        N/A     29,738     35,682     38,335     45,082     18,748     21,934
30..............................................................     27,362     34,022        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
32..............................................................        N/A        N/A     35,682     43,397        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
33..............................................................        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A     45,082     58,888     21,934     27,415
34..............................................................     34,022     41,150        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
35..............................................................        N/A        N/A     43,397     59,143        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
38..............................................................     41,150     49,875        N/A        N/A     58,888     78,203     27,415     35,991
42..............................................................     49,875     64,832     59,143     78,622     78,203    107,463     35,991     49,858
45..............................................................        N/A        N/A     78,622    101,019    107,463    132,836     49,858     62,195
48..............................................................     64,832     92,257    101,019    128,517        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
49..............................................................        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A    132,836    186,961     62,195     89,006
50..............................................................     92,257  .........    128,517  .........    186,961  .........     89,006  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1985

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in Sec. 302-
11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees who received covered 
taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1985.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
11..............................................................     $3,455     $4,668     $4,834     $7,245     $7,770     $9,566     $3,329     $4,460
12..............................................................      4,668      5,865      7,245      9,726      9,566     12,134      4,460      5,767
14..............................................................      5,865      8,209      9,726     12,174     12,134     17,001      5,767      8,384
15..............................................................      8,209     10,420        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
16..............................................................     10,420     12,957        N/A        N/A     17,001     21,757      8,384     10,689

[[Page 197]]

                                                                                                                                                        
17..............................................................        N/A        N/A     12,174     15,623        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
18..............................................................     12,957     15,242     15,623     19,303     21,757     26,795     10,689     13,161
20..............................................................     15,242     17,601     19,303     23,250        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
22..............................................................        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A     26,795     32,275     13,161     15,569
23..............................................................     17,601     21,513        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
24..............................................................        N/A        N/A     23,250     29,995        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
25..............................................................        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A     32,275     39,016     15,569     18,966
26..............................................................     21,513     28,102        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
28..............................................................        N/A        N/A     29,995     37,075     39,016     46,428     18,966     22,953
30..............................................................     28,102     35,112        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
32..............................................................        N/A        N/A     37,075     44,145        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
33..............................................................        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A     46,428     60,694     22,953     29,565
34..............................................................     35,112     42,507        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
35..............................................................        N/A        N/A     44,145     59,644        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
38..............................................................     42,507     53,394        N/A        N/A     60,694     80,537     29,565     39,359
42..............................................................     53,394     72,157     59,644     83,982     80,537    114,119     39,359     54,702
45..............................................................        N/A        N/A     83,982    113,966    114,119    147,522     54,702     75,409
48..............................................................     72,157    101,995    113,966    145,359        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
49..............................................................        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A    147,522    207,441     75,409    110,906
50..............................................................    101,995  .........    145,359  .........    207,441  .........    110,906  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1986

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 1 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees who 
received covered taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1986.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
11..............................................................     $6,180     $7,370     $6,782     $9,533     $9,670    $11,795     $5,840     $7,879
12..............................................................      7,370      8,450      9,533     10,523     11,795     13,739      7,879      9,665
14..............................................................      8,450     10,710     10,523     12,705     13,739     18,356      9,665     11,000
15..............................................................     10,710     11,775        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
16..............................................................     11,775     13,197        N/A        N/A     18,356     23,068     11,000     11,600
17..............................................................        N/A        N/A     12,705     16,050        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
18..............................................................     13,197     15,648     16,050     19,764     23,068     27,963     11,600     13,947
20..............................................................     15,648     18,108     19,764     23,841        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
22..............................................................        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A     27,963     33,533     13,947     16,843
23..............................................................     18,108     22,040        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
24..............................................................        N/A        N/A     23,841     29,849        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
25..............................................................        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A     33,533     40,202     16,843     20,297
26..............................................................     22,040     28,198        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
28..............................................................        N/A        N/A     29,849     35,320     40,202     46,870     20,297     22,659
30..............................................................     28,198     33,918        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
32..............................................................        N/A        N/A     35,320     41,715        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
33..............................................................        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A     46,870     59,477     22,659     30,364
34..............................................................     33,918     40,741        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
35..............................................................        N/A        N/A     41,715     54,643        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
38..............................................................     40,741     47,419        N/A        N/A     59,477     76,132     30,364     44,795
42..............................................................     47,419     64,468     54,643     74,430     76,132    104,120     44,795     55,653
45..............................................................        N/A        N/A     74,430    112,442    104,120    128,224     55,653     69,383
48..............................................................     64,468     96,172    112,442    129,934        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
49..............................................................        N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A    128,224    183,988     69,383    106,160
50..............................................................     96,172  .........    129,934  .........    183,988  .........    106,160  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1987

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 1 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar year 1987.

[[Page 198]]



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
11..............................................................     $4,650     $6,481     $7,763    $10,309    $10,400    $13,719     $5,811     $7,081
15..............................................................      6,481     21,979     10,309     31,379     13,719     40,020      7,081     19,602
28..............................................................     21,979     33,433     31,379     47,903     40,020     58,705     19,602     31,572
35..............................................................     33,433     58,810     47,903     88,015     58,705    101,432     31,572     54,120
38.5............................................................     58,810  .........     88,015  .........    101,432  .........     54,120  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1988

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 1 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar year 1988.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $5,260    $23,920     $9,440    $34,215    $12,500    $43,410     $6,200    $21,880
28..............................................................     23,920     52,310     34,215     77,300     43,410     88,740     21,880     47,475
33..............................................................     52,310    113,370     77,300    166,910     88,740    197,820     47,475    133,415
28..............................................................    113,370  .........    166,910  .........    197,820  .........    133,415  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1989

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 1 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar year 1989.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $5,320    $24,111     $9,061    $33,963    $12,940    $43,397     $6,723    $23,089
28..............................................................     24,111     50,311     33,963     71,688     43,397     84,030     23,089     54,177
33..............................................................     50,311    110,883     71,688    164,538     84,030    198,284     54,177    145,523
28..............................................................    110,883  .........    164,538  .........    198,284  .........    145,523  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1990

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 1 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar year 1990.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $5,556    $25,167     $9,824    $35,312    $12,652    $44,759     $6,885    $23,089
28..............................................................     25,167     51,042     35,312     75,233     44,759     84,283     23,089     50,147
33..............................................................     51,042    112,588     75,233    170,564     84,283    200,559     50,147    148,107
28..............................................................    112,588  .........    170,564  .........    200,559  .........    148,107  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



[[Page 199]]

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1991

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 1 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar year 1991.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $5,754    $26,242    $10,177    $36,611    $13,093    $46,770     $7,120    $23,977
28..............................................................     26,242     55,330     36,611     78,894     46,770     94,598     23,977     47,908
31..............................................................     55,330  .........     78,894  .........     94,598  .........     47,908  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1992

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 1 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar year 1992.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $6,190    $27,963    $10,864    $38,611    $14,316    $50,219     $7,819    $25,629
28..............................................................     27,963     58,786     38,611     83,158     50,219    101,123     25,629     50,939
31..............................................................     58,786  .........     83,158  .........    101,123  .........     50,939  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1993

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 1 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar year 1993.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................   $  6,253   $ 29,075   $ 11,181   $ 41,832   $ 15,153   $ 53,837   $  7,677   $ 27,035
28..............................................................     29,075     65,032     41,832     96,209     53,837    112,456     27,035     55,674
31..............................................................     65,032    135,204     96,209    151,017    112,456    167,399     55,674     87,153
36..............................................................    135,204    275,043    151,017    270,700    167,399    276,908     87,153    146,600
39.6............................................................    275,043  .........    270,700  .........    276,908  .........    146,600  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1994

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 1 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar year 1994.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $6,492    $30,068    $11,603    $43,304    $15,846    $55,773     $7,738    $27,855
28..............................................................     30,068     67,256     43,304     97,172     55,773    115,653     27,855     58,980
31..............................................................     67,256    134,936     97,172    155,995    115,653    167,653     58,980     86,842
36..............................................................    134,936    273,705    155,995    284,250    167,653    277,401     86,842    142,545
39.6............................................................    273,705  .........    284,250  .........    277,401  .........    142,545  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 200]]

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1995

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 1 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar year 1995.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $6,643    $30,783    $11,937    $44,304    $16,387    $57,249     $8,171    $28,637
28..............................................................     30,783     68,684     44,304    102,201     57,249    119,362     28,637     59,017
31..............................................................     68,684    139,546    102,201    163,966    119,362    173,514     59,017     88,341
36..............................................................    139,546    283,746    163,966    294,200    173,514    286,217     88,341    147,650
39.6............................................................    283,746  .........    294,200  .........    286,217  .........    147,650  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1996

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 1 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar year 1996.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $6,885    $31,807    $12,295    $45,572    $17,027    $59,055     $8,229    $29,600
28..............................................................     31,807     70,867     45,572    105,805     59,055    123,190     29,600     61,245
31..............................................................     70,867    144,170    105,805    168,990    123,190    179,414     61,245     90,611
36..............................................................    144,170    292,883    168,990    301,968    179,414    295,681     90,611    150,779
39.6............................................................    292,883  .........    301,968  .........    295,681  .........    150,779  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 5, 55 FR 1674, Jan. 
18, 1990; FTR Amdt. 15, 56 FR 10378, Mar. 12, 1991; FTR Amdt. 24, 57 FR 
1112, Jan. 10, 1992; FTR Amdt. 28, 58 FR 8547, Feb. 16, 1993; FTR Amdt. 
35, 59 FR 22520, May 2, 1994; FTR Amdt. 43, 60 FR 2536, Jan. 10, 1995; 
FTR Amdt. 46, 61 FR 3838, Feb. 2, 1996; FTR Amdt. 57, 62 FR 8174, Feb. 
24, 1997]
      Appendix B to Part 302-11--State Tax Tables for RIT Allowance

  State Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Years 1983/1984

    The following table is to be used to determine the State marginal 
tax rates for calculation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(2).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Marginal tax rates (stated in percents) for the earned income amounts  
                                                           specified in each column \1\ \2\                     
         State (or district)         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       $20,000-$24,999    $25,000-$49,999    $50,000-$74,999     $75,000 & over 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1. Alabama.........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 2. Alaska..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 3. Arizona.........................              8                  8                  8                  8    
 4. Arkansas........................              6                  7                  7                  7    
 5. California......................              3                  7                 11                 11    
    If single status \3\............              8                 11                 11                 11    
 6. Colorado........................              8                  8                  8                  8    
 7. Connecticut.....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 8. Delaware........................              8.4               11                 13.5               13.5  
    If single status \3\............              8.8               12.2               13.5               13.5  
 9. District of Columbia............             10                 11                 11                 11    
10. Florida.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
11. Georgia.........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
12. Hawaii..........................              8.5               10                 10.5               11    
    If single status \3\............             10.5               11                 11                 11    
13. Idaho...........................              7.5                7.5                7.5                7.5  
14. Illinois........................              2.5                2.5                2.5                2.5  

[[Page 201]]

                                                                                                                
15. Indiana.........................              3                  3                  3                  3    
16. Iowa............................              8                 11                 12                 13    
17. Kansas..........................              7.5                9                  9                  9    
18. Kentucky........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
19. Louisiana.......................              4                  4                  6                  6    
20. Maine...........................              8                  9.2               10                 10    
    If single status \3\............              9.2               10                 10                 10    
21. Maryland........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
22. Massachusetts...................              5.375              5.375              5.375              5.375
23. Michigan........................              5.35               5.35               5.35               5.35 
24. Minnesota.......................             14                 16                 16                 16    
25. Mississippi.....................              5                  5                  5                  5    
26. Missouri........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
27. Montana.........................              9                 10                 11                 11    
                                                                                                                
28. Nebraska........................               * 19 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\             
                                                                                                                
29. Nevada..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
30. New Hampshire...................              0                  0                  0                  0    
31. New Jersey......................              2                  2.5                3.5                3.5  
32. New Mexico......................              3.9                5.6                6.5                7.8  
    If single status \3\............              6.1                6.9                7.4                7.8  
33. New York........................             11                 14                 14                 14    
    If single status \3\............             13                 14                 14                 14    
34. North Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
35. North Dakota....................              6                  8                  9                  9    
36. Ohio............................              4.75               5.7                6.65               9.5  
37. Oklahoma........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
38. Oregon..........................             10.8               10.8               10.8               10.8  
39. Pennsylvania....................              2.35               2.35               2.35               2.35 
                                                                                                                
40. Rhode Island....................              * 25.5 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\            
                                                                                                                
41. South Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
42. South Dakota....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
43. Tennessee.......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
44. Texas...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
45. Utah............................              7.75               7.75               7.75               7.75 
46. Vermont.........................               * 26 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\             
47. Virginia........................              5.75               5.75               5.75               5.75 
48. Washington......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
49. West Virginia...................              3.5                7.4               10.5               13    
    If single status \3\............              8.2               12.6               13                 13    
50. Wisconsin.......................              8.7                9.5               10                 10    
51. Wyoming.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Earned income amounts that fall between the income brackets shown in this table (e.g., $24,999.45,          
  $49,999.75) should be rounded to the nearest dollar to determine the marginal tax rate to be used in          
  calculating the RIT allowance.                                                                                
\2\ If the earned income amount is less than the lowest income bracket shown in this table, the employing agency
  shall establish an appropriate marginal tax rate as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(ii).                     
\3\ This rate applies only to those individuals certifying that they will file under a single status within the 
  States where they will pay income taxes. All other taxpayers, regardless of filing status, will use the other 
  rate shown.                                                                                                   
\4\ Rates shown as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as        
  provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                        

     State Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1985

    The following table is to be used to determine the State marginal 
tax rates for calculation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(2). This table is to be used for employees who received 
covered taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1985.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Marginal tax rates (stated in percents) for the earned income amounts  
                                                           specified in each column \1\ \2\                     
         State (or district)         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       $20,000-$24,999    $25,000-$49,999    $50,000-$74,999    $75,000 and over
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1. Alabama.........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 2. Alaska..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 3. Arizona.........................              8                  8                  8                  8    
 4. Arkansas........................              6                  7                  7                  7    
 5. California......................              3                  7                 11                 11    
    If single status \3\............              8                 11                 11                 11    
 6. Colorado........................              8                  8                  8                  8    
 7. Connecticut.....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 8. Delaware........................              7.6                9.9               10.7               10.7  
 9. District of Columbia............             10                 11                 11                 11    

[[Page 202]]

                                                                                                                
10. Florida.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
11. Georgia.........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
12. Hawaii..........................              8.5               10                 10.5               11    
    If single status \3\............             10.5               11                 11                 11    
13. Idaho...........................              7.5                7.5                7.5                7.5  
14. Illinois........................              2.5                2.5                2.5                2.5  
15. Indiana.........................              3                  3                  3                  3    
16. Iowa............................              8                 11                 12                 13    
17. Kansas..........................              7.5                9                  9                  9    
18. Kentucky........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
19. Louisiana.......................              4                  4                  6                  6    
20. Maine...........................              7                  9.2               10                 10    
    If single status \3\............              9.2               10                 10                 10    
21. Maryland........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
22. Massachusetts...................              5.375              5.375              5.375              5.375
23. Michigan........................              5.35               5.35               5.35               5.35 
24. Minnesota.......................             14                 16                 16                 16    
25. Mississippi.....................              5                  5                  5                  5    
26. Missouri........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
27. Montana.........................              9                 10                 11                 11    
                                                                                                                
28. Nebraska .......................               * 19 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\             
                                                                                                                
29. Nevada..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
30. New Hampshire...................              0                  0                  0                  0    
31. New Jersey......................              2                  2.5                3.5                3.5  
32. New Mexico......................              3.5                5.6                6.5                7.8  
    If single status \3\............              6.1                6.9                7.4                7.8  
33. New York........................             11                 14                 14                 14    
    If single status \3\............             13                 14                 14                 14    
34. North Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
35. North Dakota....................              6                  8                  9                  9    
36. Ohio............................              4.75               5.7                6.65               9.5  
37. Oklahoma........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
38. Oregon..........................             10.8               10.8               10.8               10.8  
39. Pennsylvania....................              2.35               2.35               2.35               2.35 
                                                                                                                
40. Rhode Island ...................              * 23.15 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\           
                                                                                                                
41. South Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
42. South Dakota....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
43. Tennessee.......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
44. Texas...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
45. Utah............................              7.75               7.75               7.75               7.75 
                                                                                                                
46. Vermont ........................              * 26.5 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\            
                                                                                                                
47. Virginia........................              5.75               5.75               5.75               5.75 
48. Washington......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
49. West Virginia...................              3.5                7.4               10.5               13    
    If single status \3\............              8.2               12.6               13                 13    
50. Wisconsin.......................              8.7                9.5               10                 10    
51. Wyoming.........................              0                  0                  0                 0     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Earned income amounts that fall between the income brackets shown in this table (e.g., $24,999.45,          
  $49,999.75) should be rounded to the nearest dollar to determine the marginal tax rate to be used in          
  calculating the RIT allowance.                                                                                
\2\ If the earned income amount is less than the lowest income bracket shown in this table, the employing agency
  shall establish an appropriate marginal tax rate as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(ii).                     
\3\ This rate applies only to those individuals certifying that they will file under a single status within the 
  States where they will pay income taxes. All other taxpayers, regardless of filing status, will use the other 
  rate shown.                                                                                                   
\4\ Rates shown as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as        
  provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                        

     State Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1986

    The following table is to be used to determine the State marginal 
tax rates for calculation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(2). This table is to be used for employees who received 
covered taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1986.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Marginal tax rates (stated in percents) for the earned income amounts  
                                                           specified in each column \1\ \2\                     
         State (or district)         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       $20,000-$24,999    $25,000-$49,999    $50,000-$74,999    $75,000 and over
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1. Alabama.........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 2. Alaska..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 3. Arizona.........................              8                  8                  8                  8    

[[Page 203]]

                                                                                                                
 4. Arkansas........................              6                  7                  7                  7    
 5. California......................              3                  7                 11                 11    
     If single status \3\...........              8                 11                 11                 11    
 6. Colorado........................              8                  8                  8                  8    
 7. Connecticut.....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 8. Delaware........................              6.9                9.0                9.7                9.7  
 9. District of Columbia............             10                 11                 11                 11    
10. Florida.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
11. Georgia.........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
12. Hawaii..........................              8.5               10.0               10.5               11    
     If single status \3\...........             10.5               11                 11                 11    
13. Idaho...........................              7.5                7.5                7.5                7.5  
14. Illinois........................              2.5                2.5                2.5                2.5  
15. Indiana.........................              3                  3                  3                  3    
16. Iowa............................              8                 11                 12                 13    
17. Kansas..........................              7.5                9                  9                  9    
18. Kentucky........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
19. Louisiana.......................              4                  4                  6                  6    
20. Maine...........................              7                  9.2               10                 10    
     If single status \3\...........              9.2               10                 10                 10    
21. Maryland........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
22. Massachusetts...................              5.19               5.19               5.19               5.19 
23. Michigan........................              4.725              4.725              4.725              4.725
24. Minnesota.......................             11                 14                 14                 14    
     If single status \3\...........             14                 14                 14                 14    
25. Mississippi.....................              5                  5                  5                  5    
26. Missouri........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
27. Montana.........................              9                 10                 11                 11    
                                                                                                                
28. Nebraska........................               * 19 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\             
                                                                                                                
29. Nevada..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
30. New Hampshire...................              0                  0                  0                  0    
31. New Jersey......................              2                  2.5                3.5                3.5  
32. New Mexico......................              4.8                6.9                7.7                8.5  
33. New York........................             11                 13.5               13.5               13.5  
34. North Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
35. North Dakota....................              6                  8                  9                  9    
36. Ohio............................              4.513              5.415              6.318              9.025
37. Oklahoma........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
38. Oregon..........................              9.75               9.75               9.75               9.75 
39. Pennsylvania....................              2.167              2.167              2.167              2.167
                                                                                                                
40. Rhode Island....................              * 22.21 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\           
                                                                                                                
41. South Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
42. South Dakota....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
43. Tennessee.......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
44. Texas...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
45. Utah............................              7.75               7.75               7.75               7.75 
46. Vermont.........................              * 26.5 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\            
                                                                                                                
47. Virginia........................              5.75               5.75               5.75               5.75 
48. Washington......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
49. West Virginia...................              3.5                7.4               10.5               13    
     If single status \3\...........              8.2               12.6               12.9               13    
50. Wisconsin.......................              9.1                9.5               10                 10    
51. Wyoming.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Earned income amounts that fall between the income brackets shown in this table (e.g., $24,999.45,          
  $49,999.75) should be rounded to the nearest dollar to determine the marginal tax rate to be used in          
  calculating the RIT allowance.                                                                                
\2\ If the earned income amount is less than the lowest income bracket shown in this table, the employing agency
  shall establish an appropriate marginal tax rate as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(ii).                     
\3\ This rate applies only to those individuals certifying that they will file under a single status within the 
  States where they will pay income taxes. All other taxpayers, regardless of filing status, will use the other 
  rate shown.                                                                                                   
\4\ Rates shown as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as        
  provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                        

     State Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1987

    The following table is to be used to determine the State marginal 
tax rates for calculation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(2). This table is to be used for employees who received 
covered taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1987.

[[Page 204]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Marginal tax rates (stated in percents) for the earned income amounts  
                                                           specified in each column \1\ \2\                     
         State (or district)         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       $20,000-$24,999    $25,000-$49,999    $50,000-$74,999     $75,000 & over 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1. Alabama.........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 2. Alaska..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 3. Arizona.........................              7                  8                  8                  8    
 4. Arkansas........................              4.5                7                  7                  7    
     If single status \3\...........              6                  7                  7                  7    
 5. California......................              2                  9.3                9.3                9.3  
    If single status \3\............              8                  9.3                9.3                9.3  
 6. Colorado........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 7. Connecticut.....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 8. Delaware........................              6.1                8.2                8.8                8.8  
 9. District of Columbia............              8                 10                 10                 10    
10. Florida.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
11. Georgia.........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
12. Hawaii..........................              8.25               9.75              10                 10    
    If single status \3\............              9.75              10                 10                 10    
13. Idaho...........................              7.8                8.2                8.2                8.2  
14. Illinois........................              2.5                2.5                2.5                2.5  
15. Indiana.........................              3.2                3.2                3.2                3.2  
16. Iowa............................              7                 11                 12                 13    
17. Kansas..........................              7.5                9                  9                  9    
18. Kentucky........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
19. Louisiana.......................              4                  4                  6                  6    
20. Maine...........................              3                  9.2               10                 10    
    If single status \3\............              9.2               10                 10                 10    
21. Maryland........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
22. Massachusetts...................              5                  5                  5                  5    
23. Michigan........................              4.6                4.6                4.6                4.6  
24. Minnesota.......................              8                  9                  9                  9    
25. Mississippi.....................              5                  5                  5                  5    
26. Missouri........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
27. Montana.........................              7                 10                 11                 11    
    If single status \3\............              9                 10                 11                 11    
28. Nebraska........................              3.2                5                  5.9                5.9  
    If single status \3\............              5                  5.9                5.9                5.9  
29. Nevada..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
30. New Hampshire...................              0                  0                  0                  0    
31. New Jersey......................              2                  2.5                3.5                3.5  
32. New Mexico......................              3.8                5.9                7.7                8.5  
    If single status \3\............              5.8                7.7                8.5                8.5  
33. New York........................              7                  8.75               8.75               8.75 
    If single status \3\............              8.75               8.75               8.75               8.75 
34. North Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
35. North Dakota....................              6.67               9.33              12                 12    
    If single status \3\............              8                 10.67              12                 12    
36. Ohio............................              3.004              4.506              5.257              6.008
37. Oklahoma........................              4                  6                  6                  6    
    If single status \3\............              6                  6                  6                  6    
38. Oregon..........................              9                  9                  9                  9    
39. Pennsylvania....................              2.1                2.1                2.1                2.1  
                                                                                                                
40. Rhode Island ...................              * 23.46 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\           
                                                                                                                
41. South Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
42. South Dakota....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
43. Tennessee.......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
44. Texas...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
45. Utah............................              7.75               7.75               7.75               7.75 
                                                                                                                
46. Vermont.........................              * 25.8 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\            
                                                                                                                
47. Virginia........................              5                  5.75               5.75               5.75 
48. Washington......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
49. West Virginia...................              4                  4.5                6                  6.5  
    If single status \3\............              4                  6                  6.5                6.5  
50. Wisconsin.......................              6.55               6.93               6.93               6.93 
51. Wyoming.........................              0                  0                  0                 0     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Earned income amounts that fall between the income brackets shown in this table (e.g., $24,999.45,          
  $49,999.75) should be rounded to the nearest dollar to determine the marginal tax rate to be used in          
  calculating the RIT allowance.                                                                                
\2\ If the earned income amount is less than the lowest income bracket shown in this table, the employing agency
  shall establish an appropriate marginal tax rate as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(ii).                     
\3\ This rate applies only to those individuals certifying that they will file under a single status within the 
  States where they will pay income taxes. All other taxpayers, regardless of filing status, will use the other 
  rate shown.                                                                                                   
\4\ Rates shown as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as        
  provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                        


[[Page 205]]

     State Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1988

    The following table is to be used to determine the State marginal 
tax rates for calculation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(2). This table is to be used for employees who received 
covered taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1988.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Marginal tax rates (stated in percents) for the earned income amounts  
                                                           specified in each column \1\ \2\                     
         State (or district)         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       $20,000-$24,999    $25,000-$49,999    $50,000-$74,999    $75,000 and over
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1. Alabama.........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 2. Alaska..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 3. Arizona.........................              6                  8                  8                  8    
    If single status \3\............              8                  8                  8                  8    
 4. Arkansas........................              4.5                7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              6                  7                  7                  7    
 5. California......................              2                  6                  9.3                9.3  
    If single status \3\............              6                  9.3                9.3                9.3  
 6. Colorado........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 7. Connecticut.....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 8. Delaware........................              6                  7.6                7.7                7.7  
    If single status \3\............              6                  7.7                7.7                7.7  
 9. District of Columbia............              8                  9.5                9.5                9.5  
10. Florida.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
11. Georgia.........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
12. Hawaii..........................              8.25               9.75              10                 10    
    If single status \3\............              9.75              10                 10                 10    
13. Idaho...........................              7.5                7.8                8.2                8.2  
    If single status \3\............              7.8                8.2                8.2                8.2  
14. Illinois........................              2.5                2.5                2.5                2.5  
15. Indiana.........................              3.4                3.4                3.4                3.4  
16. Iowa............................              6.8                8.8                9.98               9.98 
    If single status \3\............              7.2                8.8                9.98               9.98 
17. Kansas..........................              4.05               5.3                5.3                5.3  
    If single status \3\............              4.8                6.1                6.1                6.1  
18. Kentucky........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
19. Louisiana.......................              2                  4                  4                  6    
    If single status \3\............              4                  4                  6                  6    
20. Maine...........................              2                  8                  8                  8    
    If single status \3\............              8                  8                  8                  8    
21. Maryland........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
22. Massachusetts...................              5                  5                  5                  5    
23. Michigan........................              4.6                4.6                4.6                4.6  
24. Minnesota.......................              6                  8                  8                  8.5  
    If single status \3\............              8                  8.5                8.5                8.5  
25. Mississippi.....................              5                  5                  5                  5    
26. Missouri........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
27. Montana.........................              7.7               11                 12.1               12.1  
    If single status \3\............              8.8               11                 12.1               12.1  
28. Nebraska........................              3.15               5                  5.9                5.9  
    If single status \3\............              5                  5.9                5.9                5.9  
29. Nevada..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
30. New Hampshire...................              0                  0                  0                  0    
31. New Jersey......................              2                  2.5                3.5                3.5  
32. New Mexico......................              3.8                6.9                7.7                8.5  
    If single status \3\............              5.8                8.5                8.5                8.5  
33. New York........................              5                  8.375              8.375              8.375
    If single status \3\............              8.375              8.375              8.375              8.375
34. North Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
                                                                                                                
35. North Dakota....................                * 14 percent of Federal income tax liablity \4\             
                                                                                                                
36. Ohio............................              2.972              4.457              5.201              6.9  
    If single status \3\............              3.715              5.201              5.201              6.9  
37. Oklahoma........................              4                  6                  6                  6    
    If single status \3\............              6                  6                  6                  6    
38. Oregon..........................              9                  9                  9                  9    
39. Pennsylvania....................              2.1                2.1                2.1                2.1  
                                                                                                                
40. Rhode Island....................              * 22.96 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\           
                                                                                                                
41. South Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
42. South Dakota....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
43. Tennessee.......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
44. Texas...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
45. Utah............................              7.75               7.75               7.75               7.75 
                                                                                                                
46. Vermont.........................               * 23 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\             
                                                                                                                
47. Virginia........................              5                  5.75               5.75               5.75 

[[Page 206]]

                                                                                                                
    If single status \3\............              5.75               5.75               5.75               5.75 
48. Washington......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
49. West Virginia...................              4                  4.5                6.5                6.5  
    If single status \3\............              4                  6                  6.5                6.5  
50. Wisconsin.......................              6.55               6.93               6.93               6.93 
    If single status \3\............              6.93               6.93               6.93               6.93 
51. Wyoming.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Earned income amounts that fall between the income brackets shown in this table (e.g., $24,999.45,          
  $49,999.75) should be rounded to the nearest dollar to determine the marginal tax rate to be used in          
  calculating the RIT allowance.                                                                                
\2\ If the earned income amount is less than the lowest income bracket shown in this table, the employing agency
  shall establish an appropriate marginal tax rate as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(ii).                     
\3\ This rate applies only to those individuals certifying that they will file under a single status within the 
  States where they will pay income taxes. All other taxpayers, regardless of filing status, will use the other 
  rate shown.                                                                                                   
\4\ Rates shown as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as        
  provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                        

     State Marginal Tax Rates By Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1989

    The following table is to be used to determine the State marginal 
tax rates for calculation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(2). This table is to be used for employees who received 
covered taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1989.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Marginal tax rates (stated in percents) for the earned income amounts  
                                                           specified in each column \1\ \2\                     
         State (or district)         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       $20,000-$24,999    $25,000-$49,999    $50,000-$74,999     $75,000 & over 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Alabama..........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
2. Alaska...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
3. Arizona..........................              6                  8                  8                  8    
    If single status \3\............              8                  8                  8                  8    
4. Arkansas.........................              4.5                7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              6                  7                  7                  7    
5. California.......................              2                  6                  9.3                9.3  
    If single status \3\............              6                  9.3                9.3                9.3  
6. Colorado.........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
7. Connecticut......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
8. Delaware.........................              6                  7.6                7.7                7.7  
    If single status \3\............              6                  7.7                7.7                7.7  
9. District of Columbia.............              8                  9.5                9.5                9.5  
10. Florida.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
11. Georgia.........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
12. Hawaii..........................              8                  9.5               10                 10    
    If single status \3\............              9.5               10                 10                 10    
13. Idaho...........................              7.5                7.8                8.2                8.2  
    If single status \3\............              7.8                8.2                8.2                8.2  
14. Illinois........................              2.75               2.75               2.75               2.75 
15. Indiana.........................              3.4                3.4                3.4                3.4  
16. Iowa............................              6.8                8.8                9.98               9.98 
    If single status \3\............              7.2                8.8                9.98               9.98 
17. Kansas..........................              3.65               5.15               5.15               5.15 
    If single status \3\............              4.5                5.95               5.95               5.95 
18. Kentucky........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
19. Louisiana.......................              2                  4                  4                  6    
    If single status \3\............              4                  4                  6                  6    
20. Maine...........................              4.5                8.5                8.5                8.5  
    If single status \3\............              8.5                8.5                8.5                8.5  
21. Maryland........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
22. Massachusetts...................              5.375              5.375              5.375              5.375
23. Michigan........................              4.6                4.6                4.6                4.6  
24. Minnesota.......................              6                  8                  8                  8.5  
    If single status \3\............              8                  8.5                8.5                8.5  
25. Mississippi.....................              5                  5                  5                  5    
26. Missouri........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
27. Montana.........................              7                 10                 11                 11    
    If single status \3\............              8                 10                 11                 11    
28. Nebraska........................              3.1                4.8                5.9                5.9  
    If single status \3\............              4.8                5.9                5.9                5.9  
29. Nevada..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
30. New Hampshire...................              0                  0                  0                  0    
31. New Jersey......................              2                  2.5                3.5                3.5  
32. New Mexico......................              3.8                6.9                7.7                8.5  

[[Page 207]]

                                                                                                                
    If single status \3\............              5.8                8.5                8.5                8.5  
33. New York........................              5                  7.875              7.875              7.875
    If single status \3\............              7.875              7.875              7.875              7.875
34. North Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
35. North Dakota....................                *17 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\             
36. Ohio............................              2.972              4.457              5.201              6.9  
    If single status \3\............              3.715              5.201              5.201              6.9  
37. Oklahoma........................              4                  6                  6                  6    
    If single status \3\............              6                  6                  6                  6    
38. Oregon..........................              9                  9                  9                  9    
39. Pennsylvania....................              2.1                2.1                2.1                2.1  
40. Rhode Island....................              *22.96 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\            
41. South Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
42. South Dakota....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
43. Tennessee.......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
44. Texas...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
45. Utah............................              7.35               7.35               7.35               7.35 
46. Vermont.........................                *25 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\             
47. Virginia........................              5                  5.75               5.75               5.75 
    If single status \3\............              5.75               5.75               5.75               5.75 
48. Washington......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
49. West Virginia...................              4                  4.5                6.5                6.5  
    If single status \3\............              4                  6                  6.5                6.5  
50. Wisconsin.......................              6.55               6.93               6.93               6.93 
    If single status \3\............              6.93               6.93               6.93               6.93 
51. Wyoming.........................              0                  0                  0                 0     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Earned income amounts that fall between the income brackets shown in this table (e.g., $24,999.45,          
  $49,999.75) should be rounded to the nearest dollar to determine the marginal tax rate to be used in          
  calculating the RIT allowance.                                                                                
\2\ If the earned income amount is less than the lowest income bracket shown in this table, the employing agency
  shall establish an appropriate marginal tax rate as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(ii).                     
\3\ This rate applies only to those individuals certifying that they will file under a single status within the 
  States where they will pay income taxes. All other taxpayers, regardless of filing status, will use the other 
  rate shown.                                                                                                   
\4\ Rates shown as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as        
  provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                        

     State Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1990

    The following table is to be used to determine the State marginal 
tax rates for calculation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(2). This table is to be used for employees who received 
covered taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1990.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Marginal tax rates (stated in percents) for the earned income amounts  
                                                           specified in each column \1\ \2\                     
         State (or district)         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       $20,000-$24,999    $25,000-$49,999    $50,000-$74,999     $75,000 & over 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Alabama..........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
2. Alaska...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
3. Arizona..........................              3.8                4.4                5.25               7    
    If single status \3\............              4.4                5.25               6.5                7    
4. Arkansas.........................              4.5                7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              6                  7                  7                  7    
5. California.......................              2                  6                  9.3                9.3  
    If single status \3\............              6                  9.3                9.3                9.3  
6. Colorado.........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
7. Connecticut......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
8. Delaware.........................              6                  7.6                7.7                7.7  
9. District of Columbia.............              8                  9.5                9.5                9.5  
10. Florida.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
11. Georgia.........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
12. Hawaii..........................              8                  9.5               10                 10    
    If single status \3\............              9.5               10                 10                 10    
13. Idaho...........................              7.8                8.2                8.2                8.2  
14. Illinois........................              3                  3                  3                  3    
15. Indiana.........................              3.4                3.4                3.4                3.4  
16. Iowa............................              6.8                8.8                9.98               9.98 
17. Kansas..........................              3.65               5.15               5.15               5.15 
18. Kentucky........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
19. Louisiana.......................              4                  4                  6                  6    
20. Maine...........................              4.5                8.5                8.5                8.5  
    If single status \3\............              8.5                8.5                8.5                8.5  
21. Maryland........................              5                  5                  5                  5    

[[Page 208]]

                                                                                                                
22. Massachusetts...................              5.95               5.95               5.95               5.95 
23. Michigan........................              4.6                4.6                4.6                4.6  
24. Minnesota.......................              6                  8                  8                  8.5  
    If single status \3\............              8                  8                  8.5                8.5  
25. Mississippi.....................              5                  5                  5                  5    
26. Missouri........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
27. Montana.........................              6                 10                 11                 11    
    If single status \3\............              8                 10                 11                 11    
28. Nebraska........................              3.361              5.21               6.41               6.41 
    If single status \3\............              5.21               6.41               6.41               6.41 
29. Nevada..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
30. New Hampshire...................              0                  0                  0                  0    
31. New Jersey......................              2                  2.5                3.5                3.5  
32. New Mexico......................              3.8                6.9                7.7                8.5  
    If single status \3\............              5.8                8.5                8.5                8.5  
33. New York........................              5                  7.875              7.875              7.875
    If single status \3\............              7.875              7.875              7.875              7.875
34. North Carolina..................              6                  7                  7                  7    
35. North Dakota....................              6.67              10.67              12                 12    
    If Single status \3\............              8                 10.67              12                 12    
36. Ohio............................              2.972              4.457              5.201              6.9  
37. Oklahoma........................              4                  7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              7                  7                  7                  7    
38. Oregon..........................              9                  9                  9                  9    
39. Pennsylvania....................              2.1                2.1                2.1                2.1  
40. Rhode Island....................               22.96 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\            
41. South Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
42. South Dakota....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
43. Tennessee.......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
44. Texas...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
45. Utah............................              7.2                7.2                7.2                7.2  
46. Vermont.........................                28 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\              
47. Virginia........................              5                  5.75               5.75               5.75 
48. Washington......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
49. West Virginia...................              4                  4.5                6.5                6.5  
    If single status \3\............              4                  6                  6.5                6.5  
50. Wisconsin.......................              6.55               6.93               6.93               6.93 
51. Wyoming.........................              0                  0                  0                 0     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Earned income amounts that fall between the income brackets shown in this table (e.g., $24,999.45,          
  $49,999.75) should be rounded to the nearest dollar to determine the marginal tax rate to be used in          
  calculating the RIT allowance.                                                                                
\2\ If the earned income amount is less than the lowest income bracket shown in this table, the employing agency
  shall establish an appropriate marginal tax rate as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(ii).                     
\3\ This rate applies only to those individuals certifying that they will file under a single status within the 
  States where they will pay income taxes. All other taxpayers, regardless of filing status, will use the other 
  rate shown.                                                                                                   
\4\ Rates shown as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as        
  provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                        


     State Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1991

    The following table is to be used to determine the State marginal 
tax rates for calculation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(2). This table is to be used for employees who received 
covered taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1991.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Marginal tax rates (stated in percents) for the earned income amounts  
                                                           specified in each column \1\ \2\                     
         State (or district)         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       $20,000-$24,999    $25,000-$49,999    $50,000-$74,999    $75,000 and over
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1. Alabama.........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 2. Alaska..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 3. Arizona.........................              3.8                4.4                5.25               7    
    If single status \3\............              4.4                5.25               6.5                7    
 4. Arkansas........................              3.5                7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              6                  7                  7                  7    
 5. California......................              2                  6                  8                 11    
    If single status \3\............              6                  9.3                9.3               11    
 6. Colorado........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 7. Connecticut.....................              1.5                1.5                1.5                1.5  
 8. Delaware........................              5                  7.6                7.7                7.7  
 9. District of Columbia............              6                  9.5                9.5                9.5  
    If single status \3\............              8                  9.5                9.5                9.5  
10. Florida.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    

[[Page 209]]

                                                                                                                
11. Georgia.........................              5                  6                  6                  6    
12. Hawaii..........................              7.25               9.5               10                 10    
    If single status \3\............              9.5               10                 10                 10    
13. Idaho...........................              6.5                7.8                8.2                8.2  
    If single status \3\............              7.8                8.2                8.2                8.2  
14. Illinois........................              3                  3                  3                  3    
15. Indiana.........................              3.4                3.4                3.4                3.4  
16. Iowa............................              5                  8.8                9.98               9.98 
    If single status \3\............              7.2                8.8                9.98               9.98 
17. Kansas..........................              3.65               3.65               5.15               5.15 
    If single status \3\............              4.5                5.95               5.95               5.95 
18. Kentucky........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
19. Louisiana.......................              2                  4                  4                  6    
    If single status  \3\...........              4                  4                  6                  6    
20. Maine...........................              4.725              8.925              8.925              9.89 
    If single status \3\............              8.925              9.89               9.89               9.89 
21. Maryland........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
22. Massachusetts...................              6.25               6.25               6.25               6.25 
23. Michigan........................              4.6                4.6                4.6                4.6  
24. Minnesota.......................              6                  8                  8                  8.5  
    If single status \3\............              8                  8                  8.5                8.5  
25. Mississippi.....................              4                  5                  5                  5    
26. Missouri........................              5.5                6                  6                  6    
27. Montana.........................              5                 10                 10                 11    
    If single status \3\............              8                 10                 11                 11    
28. Nebraska........................              3.63               5.62               6.92               6.92 
    If single status \3\............              5.62               6.92               6.92               6.92 
29. Nevada..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
30. New Hampshire...................              0                  0                  0                  0    
31. New Jersey......................              2                  2.5                3.5                7    
    If single status \3\............              2                  5                  6.5                7    
32. New Mexico......................              3.8                5.9                7.7                8.5  
    If single status \3\............              5.8                7.7                8.5                8.5  
33. New York........................              4                  7.875              7.875              7.875
    If single status \3\............              7.875              7.875              7.875              7.875
34. North Carolina..................              6                  7                  7                  7.75 
35. North Dakota....................              6.67               9.33              12                 12    
    If Single status \3\............              8                 10.67              12                 12    
36. Ohio............................              1.486              4.457              5.201              6.9  
    If single status \3\............              3.715              4.457              5.201              6.9  
37. Oklahoma........................              3                  7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              7                  7                  7                  7    
38. Oregon..........................              9                  9                  9                  9    
39. Pennsylvania....................              2.6                2.6                2.6                2.6  
                                                                                                                
40. Rhode Island....................              * 27.5 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\            
                                                                                                                
41. South Carolina..................              6                  7                  7                  7    
42. South Dakota....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
43. Tennessee.......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
44. Texas...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
45. Utah............................              7.2                7.2                7.2                7.2  
                                                                                                                
46. Vermont.........................                            * (See footnote 5) \4\                          
    If single status \3\............               * 34 percent of Federal income tax liability \4\             
                                                                                                                
47. Virginia........................              5                  5.75               5.75               5.75 
48. Washington......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
49. West Virginia...................              3                  4.5                6                  6.5  
50. Wisconsin.......................              4.9                6.93               6.93               6.93 
    If single status \3\............              6.93               6.93               6.93               6.93 
51. Wyoming.........................              0                  0                  0                 0     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Earned income amounts that fall between the income brackets shown in this table (e.g., $24,999.45,          
  $49,999.75) should be rounded to the nearest dollar to determine the marginal tax rate to be used in          
  calculating the RIT allowance.                                                                                
\2\ If the earned income amount is less than the lowest income bracket shown in this table, the employing agency
  shall establish an appropriate marginal tax rate as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(ii).                     
\3\ This rate applies only to those individuals certifying that they will file under a single status within the 
  States where they will pay income taxes. All other taxpayers, regardless of filing status, will use the other 
  rate shown.                                                                                                   
\4\ Rates shown as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as        
  provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                        
\5\ The income tax rate for Vermont (for other than single status) is 31 percent of Federal income tax liability
  for employees whose earned income amounts are between $20,000-$24,999; for all other employees the rate is 34 
  percent of Federal income tax liability.                                                                      


[[Page 210]]

     State Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1992

    The following table is to be used to determine the State marginal 
tax rates for calculation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(2). This table is to be used for employees who received 
covered taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1992.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Marginal tax rates (stated in percents) for the earned income amounts  
                                                           specified in each column \1\ \2\                     
         State (or district)         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       $20,000-$24,999    $25,000-$49,999    $50,000-$74,999    $75,000 and over
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1. Alabama.........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 2. Alaska..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 3. Arizona.........................              3.8                4.4                5.25               7    
    If single status \3\............              4.4                5.25               6.5                7    
 4. Arkansas........................              4.5                7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              6                  7                  7                  7    
 5. California......................              2                  6                  8                 11    
    If single status \3\............              6                  9.3                9.3               11    
 6. Colorado........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 7. Connecticut.....................              4.5                4.5                4.5                4.5  
 8. Delaware........................              6                  7.7                7.7                7.7  
 9. District of Columbia............              6                  9.5                9.5                9.5  
    If single status \3\............              8                  9.5                9.5                9.5  
10. Florida.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
11. Georgia.........................              5                  6                  6                  6    
12. Hawaii..........................              7.25               9.5               10                 10    
    If single status \3\............              9.5               10                 10                 10    
13. Idaho...........................              6.5                7.8                8.2                8.2  
    If single status \3\............              7.8                8.2                8.2                8.2  
14. Illinois........................              3                  3                  3                  3    
15. Indiana.........................              3.4                3.4                3.4                3.4  
16. Iowa............................              6.8                8.8                9.98               9.98 
17. Kansas..........................              3.5                6.25               6.25               6.45 
    If single status \3\............              4.4                7.75               7.75               7.75 
18. Kentucky........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
19. Louisiana.......................              2                  4                  6                  6    
    If single status  \3\...........              4                  4                  6                  6    
20. Maine...........................              4.725              8.925              8.925              9.89 
    If single status \3\............              8.925              9.89               9.89               9.89 
21. Maryland........................              5                  5                  5                  6    
22. Massachusetts...................              5.95               5.95               5.95               5.95 
23. Michigan........................              4.6                4.6                4.6                4.6  
24. Minnesota.......................              6                  8                  8                  8.5  
    If single status \3\............              8                  8                  8.5                8.5  
25. Mississippi.....................              4                  5                  5                  5    
26. Missouri........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
27. Montana.........................              5.115             10.23              11.253             11.253
    If single status \3\............              8.184             11.253             11.253             11.253
28. Nebraska........................              3.63               5.62               6.92               6.92 
    If single status \3\............              5.62               6.92               6.92               6.92 
29. Nevada..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
30. New Hampshire...................              0                  0                  0                  0    
31. New Jersey......................              2                  2.5                3.5                7    
    If single status \3\............              2                  6.5                6.5                7    
32. New Mexico......................              3.8                5.9                7.7                8.5  
    If single status \3\............              5.8                8.5                8.5                8.5  
33. New York........................              4                  7.875              7.875              7.875
    If single status \3\............              7.875              7.875              7.875              7.875
34. North Carolina..................              6                  7                  7                  7.75 
35. North Dakota....................              6.67               9.33              12                 12    
    If single status \3\............              8                 10.67              12                 12    
36. Ohio............................              1.486              4.457              5.201              6.9  
    If single status \3\............              3.715              5.201              5.201              6.9  
37. Oklahoma........................              4                  7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              7                  7                  7                  7    
38. Oregon..........................              9                  9                  9                  9    
39. Pennsylvania....................              2.95               2.95               2.95               2.95 
                                                                                                                
40. Rhode Island....................          (\4\)              (\4\)              (\4\)              (\4\)    
    If single status \3\............          (\5\)              (\5\)              (\5\)              (\5\)    
41. South Carolina..................              6                  7                  7                  7    
42. South Dakota....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
43. Tennessee.......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
44. Texas...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
45. Utah............................              7.2                7.2                7.2                7.2  
                                                                                                                
46. Vermont.........................          (\6\)              (\6\)              (\6\)              (\6\)    

[[Page 211]]

                                                                                                                
    If single status \3\............          (\7\)              (\7\)              (\7\)              (\7\)    
47. Virginia........................              5                  5.75               5.75               5.75 
48. Washington......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
49. West Virginia...................              3                  4.5                6                  6.5  
    If single status \3\............              4                  6                  6.5                6.5  
50. Wisconsin.......................              4.9                6.93               6.93               6.93 
    If single status \3\............              6.93               6.93               6.93               6.93 
51. Wyoming.........................              0                  0                  0                 0     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Earned income amounts that fall between the income brackets shown in this table (e.g., $24,999.45,          
  $49,999.75) should be rounded to the nearest dollar to determine the marginal tax rate to be used in          
  calculating the RIT allowance.                                                                                
\2\ If the earned income amount is less than the lowest income bracket shown in this table, the employing agency
  shall establish an appropriate marginal tax rate as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(ii).                     
\3\ This rate applies only to those individuals certifying that they will file under a single status within the 
  States where they will pay income taxes. All other taxpayers, regardless of filing status, will use the other 
  rate shown.                                                                                                   
\4\ The income tax rate for Rhode Island (for other than single status) is 27.5 percent of Federal income tax   
  liability for employees whose earned income amounts are between $20,000-$74,999; and 29.75 percent of Federal 
  income tax liability for employees whose earned income amounts are $75,000 and over. Rates shown as a percent 
  of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in Sec.  302-            
  11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                                              
\5\ The income tax rate for Rhode Island (for single status) is 27.5 percent of Federal income tax liability for
  employees whose earned income amounts are between $20,000-$49,999; and 29.75 percent of Federal income tax    
  liability for employees whose earned income amounts are $50,000 and over. Rates shown as a percent of Federal 
  income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).       
\6\ The income tax rate for Vermont (for other than single status) is 28 percent of Federal income tax liability
  for employees whose earned income amounts are between $20,000-$24,999; 31 percent of Federal income tax       
  liability for employees whose earned income amounts are between $25,000-$74,999; and 34 percent of Federal    
  income tax liability for employees whose earned income amounts are $75,000 and over. Rates shown as a percent 
  of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in Sec.  302-            
  11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                                              
\7\ The income tax rate for Vermont (for single status) is 28 percent of Federal income tax liability for       
  employees whose earned income amounts are between $20,000-$24,999; 31 percent of Federal income tax liability 
  for employees whose earned income amounts are between $25,000-$49,999; and 34 percent of Federal income tax   
  liability for employees whose earned income amounts are $50,000 and over. Rates shown as a percent of Federal 
  income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).       

     State Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1993

    The following table is to be used to determine the State marginal 
tax rates for calculation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(2). This table is to be used for employees who received 
covered taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1993.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Marginal tax rates (stated in percents) for the earned income amounts  
                                                           specified in each column \1\ \2\                     
         State (or district)         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       $20,000-$24,999    $25,000-$49,999    $50,000-$74,999    $75,000 and over
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1. Alabama.........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 2. Alaska..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 3. Arizona.........................              3.8                4.4                5.25               7    
    If single status \3\............              4.4                5.25               6.5                7    
 4. Arkansas........................              4.5                7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              6                  7                  7                  7    
 5. California......................              2                  4                  8                 11    
    If single status \3\............              6                  9.3                9.3               11    
 6. Colorado........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 7. Connecticut.....................              4.5                4.5                4.5                4.5  
 8. Delaware........................              6                  7.6                7.7                7.7  
 9. District of Columbia............              8                  9.5                9.5                9.5  
10. Florida.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
11. Georgia.........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
12. Hawaii..........................              8                  9.5               10                 10    
    If single status \3\............              9.5               10                 10                 10    
13. Idaho...........................              6.5                7.8                8.2                8.2  
    If single status \3\............              7.8                8.2                8.2                8.2  
14. Illinois........................              3                  3                  3                  3    
15. Indiana.........................              3.4                3.4                3.4                3.4  
16. Iowa............................              6.8                8.8                9.98               9.98 
17. Kansas..........................              3.5                6.25               6.25               6.45 
    If single status \3\............              4.4                7.75               7.75               7.75 
18. Kentucky........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
19. Louisiana.......................              4                  4                  6                  6    
20. Maine...........................              4.5                7                  8.5                8.5  
    If single status \3\............              8.5                8.5                8.5                8.5  
21. Maryland........................              5                  5                  5                  6    
22. Massachusetts...................              5.95               5.95               5.95               5.95 
23. Michigan........................              4.6                4.6                4.6                4.6  

[[Page 212]]

                                                                                                                
24. Minnesota.......................              6                  8                  8                  8.5  
    If single status \3\............              8                  8                  8.5                8.5  
25. Mississippi.....................              5                  5                  5                  5    
26. Missouri........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
27. Montana.........................              6.282              9.423             10.47              11.517
    If single status \3\............              8.376             10.47              10.47              11.517
28. Nebraska........................              3.65               5.24               6.99               6.99 
    If single status \3\............              5.24               6.99               6.99               6.99 
29. Nevada..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
30. New Hampshire...................              0                  0                  0                  0    
31. New Jersey......................              2                  2.5                3.5                7    
    If single status \3\............              2                  5                  6.5                7    
32. New Mexico......................              3.8                5.9                7.7                8.5  
    If single status \3\............              5.8                7.7                8.5                8.5  
33. New York........................              5                  7.875              7.875              7.875
    If single status \3\............              7.875              7.875              7.875              7.875
34. North Carolina..................              6                  7                  7                  7.75 
35. North Dakota....................              6.67               9.33              12                 12    
    If single status \3\............              8                 10.67              12                 12    
36. Ohio............................              2.972              4.457              5.201              7.5  
37. Oklahoma........................              5                  7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              7                  7                  7                  7    
38. Oregon..........................              9                  9                  9                  9    
39. Pennsylvania....................              2.8                2.8                2.8                2.8  
                                                                                                                
40. Rhode Island....................                               (See footnote 4)                             
                                                                                                                
    If single status \3\............                               (See footnote 5)                             
41. South Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
42. South Dakota....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
43. Tennessee.......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
44. Texas...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
45. Utah............................              7.2                7.2                7.2                7.2  
                                                                                                                
46. Vermont.........................                               (See footnote 6)                             
    If single status \3\............                               (See footnote 7)                             
                                                                                                                
47. Virginia........................              5                  5.75               5.75               5.75 
48. Washington......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
49. West Virginia...................              4                  4.5                6                  6.5  
50. Wisconsin.......................              6.55               6.93               6.93               6.93 
51. Wyoming.........................              0                  0                  0                 0     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Earned income amounts that fall between the income brackets shown in this table (e.g., $24,999.45,          
  $49,999.75) should be rounded to the nearest dollar to determine the marginal tax rate to be used in          
  calculating the RIT allowance.                                                                                
\2\ If the earned income amount is less than the lowest income bracket shown in this table, the employing agency
  shall establish an appropriate marginal tax rate as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(ii).                     
\3\ This rate applies only to those individuals certifying that they will file under a single status within the 
  States where they will pay income taxes. All other taxpayers, regardless of filing status, will use the other 
  rate shown.                                                                                                   
\4\ The income tax rate for Rhode Island (for other than single status) is 27.5 percent of Federal income tax   
  liability for employees whose earned income amounts are between $20,000-$24,999; 32 percent of Federal income 
  tax liability for employees whose earned income amounts are between $25,000-$49,999; 27.55 percent of Federal 
  income tax liability for employees whose earned income amounts are between $50,000-$74,999; and 25.05 percent 
  of Federal income tax liability for employees whose earned income amounts are $75,000 and over. Rates shown as
  a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in Sec.  302-  
  11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                                              
\5\ The income tax rate for Rhode Island (for single status) is 32 percent of Federal income tax liability for  
  employees whose earned income amounts are between $20,000-$24,999; 27.55 percent of Federal income tax        
  liability for employees whose earned income amounts are between $25,000-$74,999; and 25.05 percent of Federal 
  income tax liability for employees whose earned income amounts are $75,000 and over. Rates shown as a percent 
  of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in Sec.  302-            
  11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                                              
\6\ The income tax rate for Vermont (for other than single status) is 28 percent of Federal income tax liability
  for employees whose earned income amounts are between $20,000-$24,999; 31 percent of Federal income tax       
  liability for employees whose earned income amounts are between $25,000-$74,999; and 34 percent of Federal    
  income tax liability for employees whose earned income amounts are $75,000 and over. Rates shown as a percent 
  of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in Sec.  302-            
  11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                                              
\7\ The income tax rate for Vermont (for single status) is 28 percent of Federal income tax liability for       
  employees whose earned income amounts are between $20,000-$24,999; 31 percent of Federal income tax liability 
  for employees whose earned income amounts are between $25,000-$49,999; and 34 percent of Federal income tax   
  liability for employees whose earned income amounts are $50,000 and over. Rates shown as a percent of Federal 
  income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).       

     State Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1994

    The following table is to be used to determine the State marginal 
tax rates for calculation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(2). This table is to be used for employees who received 
covered taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1994.

[[Page 213]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Marginal tax rates (stated in percents) for the earned income amounts  
                                                             specified in each column <SUP>1, <SUP>2                      
         State (or district)         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                    $75,000 and 
                                        $20,000-$24,999     $25,000-$49,999     $50,000-$74,999        over     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1. Alabama.........................               5                   5                   5               5    
 2. Alaska..........................               0                   0                   0               0    
 3. Arizona.........................               3.25                4.0                 5.05            6.9  
    If single status \3\............               3.25                4.0                 6.4             6.9  
 4. Arkansas........................               4.5                 7                   7               7    
    If single status \3\............               6                   7                   7               7    
 5. California......................               2                   4                   8              11    
    If single status \3\............               6                   9.3                 9.3            11    
 6. Colorado........................               5                   5                   5               5    
 7. Connecticut.....................               4.5                 4.5                 4.5             4.5  
 8. Delaware........................               6                   7.6                 7.7             7.7  
 9. District of Columbia............               8                   9.5                 9.5             9.5  
10. Florida.........................               0                   0                   0               0    
11. Georgia.........................               6                   6                   6               6    
12. Hawaii..........................               8                   9.5                10              10    
    If single status \3\............               9.5                10                  10              10    
13. Idaho...........................               7.5                 7.8                 8.2             8.2  
14. Illinois........................               3                   3                   3               3    
15. Indiana.........................               3.4                 3.4                 3.4             3.4  
16. Iowa............................               6.8                 8.8                 9.98            9.98 
17. Kansas..........................               3.5                 6.25                6.25            6.45 
    If single status \3\............               4.4                 7.75                7.75            7.75 
18. Kentucky........................               6                   6                   6               6    
19. Louisiana.......................               2                   4                   6               6    
    If single status \3\............               4                   4                   6               6    
20. Maine...........................               4.5                 8.5                 8.5             8.5  
    If single status \3\............               8.5                 8.5                 8.5             8.5  
21. Maryland........................               5                   5                   5               6    
22. Massachusetts...................               5.95                5.95                5.95            5.95 
23. Michigan........................               4.4                 4.4                 4.4             4.4  
24. Minnesota.......................               6                   8                   8               8.5  
    If single status \3\............               8                   8                   8.5             8.5  
25. Mississippi.....................               5                   5                   5               5    
26. Missouri........................               6                   6                   6               6    
27. Montana.........................               6                   9                  10              11    
    If single status \3\............               8                  10                  10              11    
28. Nebraska........................               3.65                5.24                6.99            6.99 
    If single status \3\............               5.24                6.99                6.99            6.99 
29. Nevada..........................               0                   0                   0               0    
30. New Hampshire...................               0                   0                   0               0    
31. New Jersey......................               1.9                 2.375               3.325           6.65 
    If single status \3\............               1.9                 4.75                6.175           6.65 
32. New Mexico......................               3.2                 6                   7.9             8.5  
    If single status \3\............               6                   7.9                 8.5             8.5  
33. New York........................               5                   7.875               7.875           7.875
    If single status \3\............               7.875               7.875               7.875           7.875
34. North Carolina..................               6                   7                   7               7.75 
35. North Dakota....................               6.67                9.33               12              12    
    If single status \3\............               8                  10.67               12              12    
36. Ohio............................               2.972               4.457               5.201           7.5  
37. Oklahoma........................               5                   7                   7               7    
    If single status \3\............               7                   7                   7               7    
38. Oregon..........................               9                   9                   9               9    
39. Pennsylvania....................               2.8                 2.8                 2.8             2.8  
40. Rhode Island....................                               (See footnote 4)                             
    If single status \3\............                               (See footnote 5)                             
41. South Carolina..................               7                   7                   7               7    
42. South Dakota....................               0                   0                   0               0    
43. Tennessee.......................               0                   0                   0               0    
44. Texas...........................               0                   0                   0               0    
45. Utah............................               7.2                 7.2                 7.2             7.2  
46. Vermont.........................                               (See footnote 6)                             
47. Virginia........................               5                   5.75                5.75            5.75 
48. Washington......................               0                   0                   0               0    
49. West Virginia...................               4                   4.5                 6               6.5  
50. Wisconsin.......................               6.55                6.93                6.93            6.93 
51. Wyoming.........................               0                   0                   0              0     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Earned income amounts that fall between the income brackets shown in this table (e.g., $24,999.45,          
  $49,999.75) should be rounded to the nearest dollar to determine the marginal tax rate to be used in          
  calculating the RIT allowance.                                                                                
\2\ If the earned income amount is less than the lowest income bracket shown in this table, the employing agency
  shall establish an appropriate marginal tax rate as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(ii).                     

[[Page 214]]

                                                                                                                
\3\ This rate applies only to those individuals certifying that they will file under a single status within the 
  States where they will pay income taxes. All other taxpayers, regardless of filing status, will use the other 
  rate shown.                                                                                                   
\4\ The income tax rate for Rhode Island (for other than single status) is 27.5 percent of Federal income tax   
  liability for employees whose earned income amounts are between $20,000-$24,999; 32 percent of Federal income 
  tax liability for employees whose earned income amounts are between $25,000-$49,999; 27.55 percent of Federal 
  income tax liability for employees whose earned income amounts are between $50,000-$74,999; and 25.05 percent 
  of Federal income tax liability for employees whose earned income amounts are $75,000 and over. Rates shown as
  a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in Sec.  302-  
  11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                                              
\5\ The income tax rate for Rhode Island (for single status) is 32 percent of Federal income tax liability for  
  employees whose earned income amounts are between $20,000-$24,999; 27.55 percent of Federal income tax        
  liability for employees whose earned income amounts are between $25,000-$74,999; and 25.05 percent of Federal 
  income tax liability for employees whose earned income amounts are $75,000 and over. Rates shown as a percent 
  of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in Sec.  302-            
  11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                                              
\6\ The income tax rate for Vermont is 25 percent of Federal income tax liability for all employees. Rates shown
  as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in Sec.  302-
  11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                                              

     State Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1995

    The following table is to be used to determine the State marginal 
tax rates for calculation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(2). This table is to be used for employees who received 
covered taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1995.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Marginal tax rates (stated in percents) for the earned income amounts  
                                                           specified in each column \1\ \2\                     
         State (or district)         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       $20,000-$24,999    $25,000-$49,999    $50,000-$74,999    $75,000 and over
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1. Alabama.........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 2. Alaska..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 3. Arizona.........................              3.25               4                  5.05               6.9  
    If single status \3\............              4                  5.05               6.4                6.9  
 4. Arkansas........................              4.5                7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              6                  7                  7                  7    
 5. California......................              2                  4                  8                 11    
    If single status \3\............              4                  9.3                9.3               11    
 6. Colorado........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 7. Connecticut.....................              4.5                4.5                4.5                4.5  
 8. Delaware........................              6                  7.6                7.7                7.7  
 9. District of Columbia............              8                  9.5                9.5                9.5  
10. Florida.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
11. Georgia.........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
12. Hawaii..........................              8                  9.5               10                 10    
    If single status \3\............              9.5               10                 10                 10    
13. Idaho...........................              7.5                7.8                8.2                8.2  
14. Illinois........................              3                  3                  3                  3    
15. Indiana.........................              3.4                3.4                3.4                3.4  
16. Iowa............................              6.8                7.55               9.98               9.98 
    If single status \3\............              7.2                8.8                9.98               9.98 
17. Kansas..........................              3.5                6.25               6.25               6.45 
    If single status \3\............              4.4                7.75               7.75               7.75 
18. Kentucky........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
19. Louisiana.......................              2                  4                  4                  6    
    If single status \3\............              4                  4                  6                  6    
20. Maine...........................              4.5                7                  8.5                8.5  
    If single status \3\............              8.5                8.5                8.5                8.5  
21. Maryland........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
22. Massachusetts...................              5.95               5.95               5.95               5.95 
23. Michigan........................              4.4                4.4                4.4                4.4  
24. Minnesota.......................              6                  8                  8                  8.5  
    If single status \3\............              8                  8                  8.5                8.5  
25. Mississippi.....................              5                  5                  5                  5    
26. Missouri........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
27. Montana.........................              6                  9                 10                 11    
28. Nebraska........................              3.65               5.60               7.35               7.75 
    If single status \3\............              5.60               7.35               7.60               7.75 
29. Nevada..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
30. New Hampshire...................              0                  0                  0                  0    
31. New Jersey......................              1.7                2.125              2.975              6.58 
    If single status \3\............              1.7                4.25               6.013              6.58 
32. New Mexico......................              3.2                6                  7.1                8.5  
    If single status \3\............              6                  7.1                7.9                8.5  
33. New York........................              4.55               7.594              7.594              7.594
    If single status \3\............              7.594              7.594              7.594              7.594
34. North Carolina..................              6                  7                  7                  7.75 
35. North Dakota....................             14                 14                 14                 14    
                                                                   (See footnote 4)                             
36. Ohio............................              2.972              4.457              5.201              7.5  
37. Oklahoma........................              4                  7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              7                  7                  7                  7    

[[Page 215]]

                                                                                                                
38. Oregon..........................              9                  9                  9                  9    
39. Pennsylvania....................              2.8                2.8                2.8                2.8  
                                                                                                                
40. Rhode Island....................             27.5               27.5               27.5               27.5  
                                                                   (See footnote 5)                             
41. South Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
42. South Dakota....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
43. Tennessee.......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
44. Texas...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
45. Utah............................              7.2                7.2                7.2                7.2  
                                                                                                                
46. Vermont.........................                               (See footnote 6)                             
47. Virginia........................              5                  5.75               5.75               5.75 
48. Washington......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
49. West Virginia...................              4                  4.5                6                  6.5  
50. Wisconsin.......................              6.55               6.93               6.93               6.93 
51. Wyoming.........................              0                  0                  0                 0     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Earned income amounts that fall between the income brackets shown in this table (e.g., $24,999.45,          
  $49,999.75) should be rounded to the nearest dollar to determine the marginal tax rate to be used in          
  calculating the RIT allowance.                                                                                
\2\ If the earned income amount is less than the lowest income bracket shown in this table, the employing agency
  shall establish an appropriate marginal tax rate as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(ii).                     
\3\ This rate applies only to those individuals certifying that they will file under a single status within the 
  States where they will pay income taxes. All other taxpayers, regardless of filing status, will use the other 
  rate shown.                                                                                                   
\4\ The income tax rate for North Dakota is 14 percent of Federal income tax liability for all employees. Rates 
  shown as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in    
  Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                                    
\5\ The income tax rate for Rhode Island is 27.5 percent of Federal income tax liability for all employees.     
  Rates shown as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided 
  in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                                 
\6\ The income tax rate for Vermont is 25 percent of Federal income tax liability for all employees. Rates shown
  as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in Sec.  302-
  11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                                              

     State Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1996

    The following table is to be used to determine the State marginal 
tax rates for calculation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(2). This table is to be used for employees who received 
covered taxable reimbursements during calendar year 1996.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Marginal tax rates (stated in percents) for the earned income amounts  
                                                           specified in each column \1\ \2\                     
         State (or district)         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                       $20,000-$24,999    $25,000-$49,999    $50,000-$74,999    $75,000 and over
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1. Alabama.........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 2. Alaska..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
 3. Arizona.........................              3                  3.5                4.2                5.6  
 4. Arkansas........................              4.5                7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              6                  7                  7                  7    
 5. California......................              2                  4                  8                 11    
    If single status \3\............              4                  9.3                9.3               11    
 6. Colorado........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
 7. Connecticut.....................              4.5                4.5                4.5                4.5  
 8. Delaware........................              6                  7.1                7.1                7.1  
 9. District of Columbia............              8                  9.5                9.5                9.5  
10. Florida.........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
11. Georgia.........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
12. Hawaii..........................              8                  9.5               10                 10    
    If single status \3\............              9.5               10                 10                 10    
13. Idaho...........................              7.8                8.2                8.2                8.2  
14. Illinois........................              3                  3                  3                  3    
15. Indiana.........................              3.4                3.4                3.4                3.4  
16. Iowa............................              6.8                7.55               9.98               9.98 
    If single status \3\............              7.2                8.8                9.98               9.98 
17. Kansas..........................              3.5                6.25               6.25               6.45 
    If single status \3\............              4.4                7.75               7.75               7.75 
18. Kentucky........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
19. Louisiana.......................              2                  4                  4                  6    
    If single status \3\............              4                  4                  6                  6    
20. Maine...........................              4.5                7                  8.5                8.5  
    If single status \3\............              8.5                8.5                8.5                8.5  
21. Maryland........................              5                  5                  5                  5    
22. Massachusetts...................              5.95               5.95               5.95               5.95 
23. Michigan........................              4.4                4.4                4.4                4.4  
24. Minnesota.......................              6                  8                  8                  8.5  
    If single status \3\............              8                  8                  8.5                8.5  
25. Mississippi.....................              5                  5                  5                  5    

[[Page 216]]

                                                                                                                
26. Missouri........................              6                  6                  6                  6    
27. Montana.........................              6                  9                 10                 11    
28. Nebraska........................              3.65               5.24               6.99               6.99 
    If single status \3\............              5.24               6.99               6.99               6.99 
29. Nevada..........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
30. New Hampshire...................              0                  0                  0                  0    
31. New Jersey......................              1.4                1.75               2.45               6.37 
    If single status \3\............              1.4                3.45               5.25               6.37 
32. New Mexico......................              3.2                6                  7.1                8.5  
    If single status \3\............              6                  7.1                7.9                8.5  
33. New York........................              5                  7.125              7.125              7.125
    If single status \3\............              7.125              7.125              7.125              7.125
34. North Carolina..................              6                  7                  7                  7.75 
35. North Dakota....................              6.67               9.33              12                 12    
    If single status \3\............              8                 10.67              12                 12    
36. Ohio............................              2.972              4.457              5.201              7.5  
37. Oklahoma........................              4                  7                  7                  7    
    If single status \3\............              7                  7                  7                  7    
38. Oregon..........................              9                  9                  9                  9    
39. Pennsylvania....................              2.8                2.8                2.8                2.8  
                                                                                                                
40. Rhode Island....................             27.5               27.5               27.5               27.5  
                                                                   (See footnote 4)                             
41. South Carolina..................              7                  7                  7                  7    
42. South Dakota....................              0                  0                  0                  0    
43. Tennessee.......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
44. Texas...........................              0                  0                  0                  0    
45. Utah............................              7                  7                  7                  7    
                                                                                                                
46. Vermont.........................                               (See footnote 5)                             
47. Virginia........................              5                  5.75               5.75               5.75 
48. Washington......................              0                  0                  0                  0    
49. West Virginia...................              4                  4.5                6                  6.5  
50. Wisconsin.......................              6.55               6.93               6.93               6.93 
51. Wyoming.........................              0                  0                  0                 0     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Earned income amounts that fall between the income brackets shown in this table (e.g., $24,999.45,          
  $49,999.75) should be rounded to the nearest dollar to determine the marginal tax rate to be used in          
  calculating the RIT allowance.                                                                                
\2\ If the earned income amount is less than the lowest income bracket shown in this table, the employing agency
  shall establish an appropriate marginal tax rate as provided in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(ii).                     
\3\ This rate applies only to those individuals certifying that they will file under a single status within the 
  States where they will pay income taxes. All other taxpayers, regardless of filing status, will use the other 
  rate shown.                                                                                                   
\4\ The income tax rate for Rhode Island is 27.5 percent of Federal income tax liability for all employees.     
  Rates shown as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided 
  in Sec.  302-11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                                 
\5\ The income tax rate for Vermont is 25 percent of Federal income tax liability for all employees. Rates shown
  as a percent of Federal income tax liability must be converted to a percent of income as provided in Sec.  302-
  11.8(e)(2)(iii).                                                                                              

[54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 5, 55 FR 1674, Jan. 
18, 1990; 55 FR 5945, Feb. 20, 1990; 55 FR 10866, Mar. 23, 1990; FTR 
Amdt. 15, 56 FR 10379, Mar. 12, 1991; FTR Amdt. 24, 57 FR 1112, Jan. 10, 
1992; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28636, June 26, 1992; FTR Amdt. 28, 58 FR 
8547, Feb. 16, 1993; FTR Amdt. 35, 59 FR 10997, Mar. 9, 1994; FTR Amdt. 
43, 60 FR 2536, Jan. 10, 1995; FTR Amdt. 46, 61 FR 3838, Feb. 2, 1996; 
FTR Amdt. 57, 62 FR 8174, Feb. 24, 1997]
 Appendix C to Part 302-11--Federal Tax Tables for RIT Allowance--Year 2

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1987

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 2 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar years 1983, 1984, 1985, and 1986.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
11..............................................................     $4,650     $6,481     $7,763    $10,309    $10,400    $13,719     $5,811     $7,081
15..............................................................      6,481     21,979     10,309     31,379     13,719     40,020      7,081     19,602
28..............................................................     21,979     33,433     31,379     47,903     40,020     58,705     19,602     31,572

[[Page 217]]

                                                                                                                                                        
35..............................................................     33,433     58,810     47,903     88,015     58,705    101,432     31,572     54,120
38.5............................................................     58,810  .........     88,015  .........    101,432  .........     54,120  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1988

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 2 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar years 1983, 1984, 1985, 1986, and 1987.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $5,260    $23,920     $9,440    $34,215    $12,500    $43,410     $6,200    $21,880
28..............................................................     23,920     52,310     34,215     77,300     43,410     88,740     21,880     47,475
33..............................................................     52,310    113,370     77,300    166,910     88,740    197,820     47,475    133,415
28..............................................................    113,370  .........    166,910  .........    197,820  .........    133,415  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1989

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 2 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar years 1983, 1984, 1985, 1986, 1987, 
1988.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $5,320    $24,111     $9,061    $33,963    $12,940    $43,397     $6,723    $23,089
28..............................................................     24,111     50,311     33,963     71,688     43,397     84,030     23,089     54,177
33..............................................................     50,311    110,883     71,688    164,538     84,030    198,284     54,177    145,523
28..............................................................    110,883  .........    164,538  .........    198,284  .........    145,523  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1990

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 2 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar years 1983, 1984, 1985, 1986, 1987, 
1988, or 1989.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $5,556    $25,167     $9,824    $35,312    $12,652    $44,759     $6,885    $23,089
28..............................................................     25,167     51,042     35,312     75,233     44,759     84,283     23,089     50,147
33..............................................................     51,042    112,588     75,233    170,564     84,283    200,559     50,147    148,107
28..............................................................    112,588  .........    170,564  .........    200,559  .........    148,107  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1991

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 2 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar years 1983, 1984, 1985, 1986, 1987, 
1988, 1989, or 1990.

[[Page 218]]



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $5,754    $26,242    $10,177    $36,611    $13,093    $46,770     $7,120    $23,977
28..............................................................     26,242     55,330     36,611     78,894     46,770     94,598     23,977     47,908
31..............................................................     55,330  .........     78,894  .........     94,598  .........     47,908  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1992

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 2 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar years 1985, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 
1990, or 1991.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $6,190    $27,963    $10,864    $38,611    $14,316    $50,219     $7,819    $25,629
28..............................................................     27,963     58,786     38,611     83,158     50,219    101,123     25,629     50,939
31..............................................................     58,786  .........     83,158  .........    101,123  .........     50,939  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1993

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 2 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar years 1985, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 
1990, 1991, or 1992.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $6,289    $28,621    $11,017    $39,541    $14,584    $51,229     $7,740    $26,145
28..............................................................     28,621     60,303     39,541     85,315     51,229    103,223     26,145     52,226
31..............................................................     60,303  .........     85,315  .........    103,223  .........     52,226  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1994

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 2 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar years 1985, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 
1990, 1991, 1992, or 1993.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $6,492    $30,068    $11,603    $43,304    $15,846    $55,773     $7,738    $27,855
28..............................................................     30,068     67,256     43,304     97,172     55,773    115,653     27,855     58,980
31..............................................................     67,256    134,936     97,172    155,995    115,653    167,653     58,980     86,842
36..............................................................    134,936    273,705    155,995    284,250    167,653    277,401     86,842    142,545
39.6............................................................    273,705  .........    284,250  .........    277,401  .........    142,545  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1995

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 2 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for

[[Page 219]]

employees whose Year 1 occurred during calendar years 1985, 1986, 1987, 
1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, or 1994.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $6,643    $30,783    $11,937    $44,304    $16,387    $57,249     $8,171    $28,637
28..............................................................     30,783     68,684     44,304    102,201     57,249    119,362     28,637     59,017
31..............................................................     68,684    139,546    102,201    163,966    119,362    173,514     59,017     88,341
36..............................................................    139,546    283,746    163,966    294,200    173,514    286,217     88,341    147,650
39.6............................................................    283,746  .........    294,200  .........    286,217  .........    147,650  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1996

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 2 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar years 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 
1992, 1993, 1994, or 1995.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $6,885    $31,807    $12,295    $45,572    $17,027    $59,055     $8,229    $29,600
28..............................................................     31,807     70,867     45,572    105,805     59,055    123,190     29,600     61,245
31..............................................................     70,867    144,170    105,805    168,990    123,190    179,414     61,245     90,611
36..............................................................    144,170    292,883    168,990    301,968    179,414    295,681     90,611    150,779
39.6............................................................    292,883  .........    301,968  .........    295,681  .........    150,779  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Federal Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level and Filing Status--Tax 
                                Year 1997

    The following table is to be used to determine the Federal marginal 
tax rate for Year 2 for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed 
in Sec. 302-11.8(e)(1). This table is to be used for employees whose 
Year 1 occurred during calendar years 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 
1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, or 1996.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Single taxpayer     Heads of household      Married filing        Married filing   
                                                                 --------------------------------------------  jointly/qualifying        separately     
                                                                                                               widows and widowers ---------------------
                   Marginal tax rate (percent)                                But not               But not  ----------------------                     
                                                                     Over       over       Over       over                But not      Over     But not 
                                                                                                                 Over       over                  over  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..............................................................     $7,067    $32,674    $12,963    $46,966    $16,798    $59,856     $8,702    $29,669
28..............................................................     32,674     71,647     46,966    104,632     59,856    123,931     29,669     62,023
31..............................................................     71,647    141,006    104,632    161,381    123,931    180,221     62,023     92,072
36..............................................................    141,006    288,900    161,381    293,567    180,221    299,695     92,072    152,835
39.6............................................................    288,900  .........    293,567  .........    299,695  .........    152,835  .........
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[54 FR 20332, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 5, 55 FR 1676, Jan. 
18, 1990; FTR Amdt. 15, 56 FR 10380, Mar. 12, 1991; FTR Amdt. 24, 57 FR 
1114, Jan. 10, 1992; FTR Amdt. 28, 58 FR 8549, Feb 16, 1993; FTR Amdt. 
35, 59 FR 10997, Mar. 9, 1994; FTR Amdt. 43, 60 FR 2536, Jan. 10, 1995; 
FTR Amdt. 46, 61 FR 3840, Feb. 2, 1996; FTR Amdt. 57, 62 FR 8174, Feb. 
24, 1997]
   Appendix D to Part 302-11--Puerto Rico Tax Tables for RIT Allowance

  Puerto Rico Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1987

    The following table is to be used to determine the Puerto Rico 
marginal tax rate for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(4)(i).

[[Page 220]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Single filing status     Any other filing status
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
                 Marginal tax rate (percent)                                 But not                   But not  
                                                                  Over         over         Over         over   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
25.66.......................................................  ...........      $25,000  ...........  ...........
33.35.......................................................  ...........  ...........  ...........      $25,000
47.03.......................................................      $25,000       50,000  ...........  ...........
50.00.......................................................       50,000  ...........      $25,000  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Puerto Rico Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1988

    The following table is to be used to determine the Puerto Rico 
marginal tax rate for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(4)(i).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Single filing status     Any other filing status
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
                 Marginal tax rate (percent)                                 But not                   But not  
                                                                  Over         over         Over         over   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..........................................................  ...........      $25,000  ...........  ...........
25..........................................................  ...........  ...........  ...........      $25,000
41..........................................................      $25,000  ...........      $25,000  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Puerto Rico Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1989

    The following table is to be used to determine the Puerto Rico 
marginal tax rate for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(4)(i).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Single filing status     Any other filing status
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
                 Marginal tax rate (percent)                                 But not                   But not  
                                                                  Over         over         Over         over   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..........................................................  ...........      $25,000  ...........  ...........
25..........................................................  ...........  ...........  ...........      $25,000
38..........................................................      $25,000  ...........      $25,000  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Puerto Rico Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1990

    The following table is to be used to determine the Puerto Rico 
marginal tax rate for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(4)(i).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Single filing status     Any other filing status
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
                 Marginal tax rate (percent)                                 But not                   But not  
                                                                  Over         over         Over         over   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..........................................................  ...........      $25,000  ...........  ...........
25..........................................................  ...........  ...........  ...........      $25,000
41..........................................................      $25,000  ...........      $25,000  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Puerto Rico Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1991

    The following table is to be used to determine the Puerto Rico 
marginal tax rate for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(4)(i).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Single filing status     Any other filing status
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
                 Marginal tax rate (percent)                                 But not                   But not  
                                                                  Over         over         Over         over   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..........................................................  ...........      $25,000  ...........  ...........
25..........................................................  ...........  ...........  ...........      $25,000
36..........................................................      $25,000  ...........      $25,000  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Puerto Rico Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1992

    The following table is to be used to determine the Puerto Rico 
marginal tax rate for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(4)(i).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Single filing status     Any other filing status
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
                 Marginal tax rate (percent)                                 But not                   But not  
                                                                  Over         over         Over         over   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..........................................................  ...........      $25,000  ...........  ...........
25..........................................................  ...........  ...........  ...........      $25,000
36..........................................................      $25,000  ...........      $25,000  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 221]]

  Puerto Rico Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1993

    The following table is to be used to determine the Puerto Rico 
marginal tax rate for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(4)(i).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Single filing status     Any other filing status
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
                 Marginal tax rate (percent)                                 But not                   But not  
                                                                  Over         over         Over         over   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..........................................................  ...........  ...........  ...........      $25,000
25..........................................................  ...........      $25,000  ...........  ...........
36..........................................................      $25,000  ...........      $25,000  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Puerto Rico Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1994

    The following table is to be used to determine the Puerto Rico 
marginal tax rate for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(4)(i).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Single filing status     Any other filing status
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
                 Marginal tax rate (percent)                                 But not                   But not  
                                                                  Over         over         Over         over   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
15..........................................................  ...........  ...........  ...........      $25,000
25..........................................................  ...........      $25,000  ...........  ...........
36..........................................................      $25,000  ...........      $25,000  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Puerto Rico Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1995

    The following table is to be used to determine the Puerto Rico 
marginal tax rate for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(4)(i).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Single filing status     Any other filing status
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
                 Marginal tax rate (percent)                                 But not                   But not  
                                                                  Over         over         Over         over   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
12..........................................................  ...........  ...........  ...........      $25,000
18..........................................................  ...........      $25,000  ...........  ...........
31..........................................................  ...........  ...........      $25,000      $50,000
33..........................................................      $25,000  ...........      $50,000  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Puerto Rico Marginal Tax Rates by Earned Income Level--Tax Year 1996

    The following table is to be used to determine the Puerto Rico 
marginal tax rate for computation of the RIT allowance as prescribed in 
Sec. 302-11.8(e)(4)(i).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Single filing status     Any other filing status
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
                 Marginal tax rate (percent)                                 But not                   But not  
                                                                  Over         over         Over         over   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
12..........................................................  ...........  ...........  ...........      $25,000
18..........................................................  ...........      $25,000  ...........  ...........
31..........................................................      $25,000      $50,000      $25,000      $50,000
33..........................................................      $50,000  ...........      $50,000  ...........
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[FTR Amdt. 30, 58 FR 15438, Mar. 23, 1993, as amended by FTR Amdt. 35, 
59 FR 10997, Mar. 9, 1994; FTR Amdt. 43, 60 FR 2536, Jan. 10, 1995; FTR 
Amdt. 46, 61 FR 3840, Feb. 2, 1996; FTR Amdt. 57, 62 FR 8176, Feb. 24, 
1997]


<R03>
PART 302-12--USE OF A RELOCATION SERVICES COMPANY--Table of Contents

<R05>


        Subpart A--Agency's Use of a Relocation Services Company

Sec.
302-12.1  What are ``relocation services''?
302-12.2  May we enter into a contract with a relocation services 
          company for the company to provide relocation services?
302-12.3  What contracted relocation services may we provide at 
          Government expense?
302-12.4  May we separately contract for each type of relocation 
          service?
302-12.5  What is the purpose of contracting for relocation services?
302-12.6  How must we administer a relocation services contract?
302-12.7  What policies must we establish when offering our employees 
          the services of a relocation services company?
302-12.8  What rules must we follow when contracting for relocation 
          services?

[[Page 222]]

302-12.9  What are the income tax consequences that we must consider 
          when offering relocation services?
302-12.10  What must we consider in deciding whether to use the fixed-
          fee or cost-reimbursable contracting method?
302-12.11  May we take title to an employee's residence?
302-12.12  Under a homesale program, may we establish a maximum home 
          value above which we will not pay for homesale services?
302-12.13  Under a homesale program, may we pay an employee for losses 
          he/she incurs on the sale of a residence?
302-12.14  Under a homesale program, may we direct the relocation 
          services company to pay an employee more than the fair market 
          value of his/her residence?
302-12.15  May we use a relocation services contract for services which 
          we are contractually bound to obtain under another travel 
          services contract?

       Subpart B--Employee's Use of a Relocation Services Company

302-12.100  Am I eligible to use a relocation services company?
302-12.101  Must my agency allow me to use a relocation services 
          company?
302-12.102  Under what conditions may I use a relocation services 
          company?
302-12.103  For what relocation services expenses will my agency pay?
302-12.104  If I use a contracted-for relocation service that is a 
          substitute for reimbursable relocation allowance, will I be 
          reimbursed for the relocation allowance as well?
302-12.105  What expenses will my agency pay if I use a relocation 
          services company to ship household goods in excess of the 
          maximum weight allowance?
302-12.106  What expenses will my agency pay if I use a relocation 
          services company to sell or purchase a residence for which I 
          and/or a member(s) of my immediate family do not have full 
          title?
302-12.107  If my agency authorizes me to enter a homesale program, must 
          I accept a buyout offer from the relocation services company?
302-12.108  What are the income tax consequences if I use a relocation 
          services company?

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5738 and 20 U.S.C. 905(c).

    Source: FTR Amdt. 62, 62 FR 13766, Mar. 21, 1997, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
        Subpart A--Agency's Use of a Relocation Services Company

    Note to subpart A: Use of the pronouns ``we'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.1  What are ``relocation services''?

    ``Relocation services'' are services provided by a private company 
under a contract with an agency to assist a transferred employee in 
relocating to the new official station. Examples include homesale 
programs, home marketing assistance, home finding assistance, and 
property management services.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.2  May we enter into a contract with a relocation services company for the company to provide relocation services?

    Yes.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.3  What contracted relocation services may we provide at Government expense?

    You may pay for contracted relocation services that are a substitute 
for reimbursable relocation allowances authorized throughout this 
chapter. For example, you may pay for homesale services as a substitute 
for residence sale expenses, or household goods management services as a 
substitute for transportation of household goods.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.4  May we separately contract for each type of relocation service?

    Yes, or you may combine several types of relocation services in a 
single contract.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.5  What is the purpose of contracting for relocation services?

    To improve the treatment of employees who are directed to relocate 
to facilitate the retention of a well-qualified workforce.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.6  How must we administer a relocation services contract?

    You must balance the positive effects that availability of 
relocation services has on employee mobility and morale with any 
increased costs your agency may experience as a result of providing 
relocation services.

[[Page 223]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.7  What policies must we establish when offering our employees the services of a relocation services company? You must establish policies governing:

    (a) The conditions under which you will authorize an employee to use 
a relocation services company;
    (b) Which employees you will allow to use a relocation services 
company;
    (c) What relocation services you will offer an employee; and
    (d) Who will determine in each case if an employee may use a 
relocation services company and what services will be offered.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.8  What rules must we follow when contracting for relocation services?

    The rules contained in the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) (48 
CFR) and/or other procurement regulations applicable to you.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.9  What are the income tax consequences that we must consider when offering relocation services?

    Amounts you pay to a relocation services company on behalf of an 
employee may be taxable to the employee. In some cases, such as with 
certain homesale programs, the amounts may not be taxable. You must 
determine the taxability of such payments, and pay a relocation income 
tax (RIT) allowance in accordance with part 302-11 of this chapter on 
payments you determine to be taxable to the employee. You may contact 
the Assistant Chief Counsel (Income Tax & Accounting), Internal Revenue 
Service, 1111 Constitution Avenue, NW., Room 5501, Washington, DC 20224, 
for information on the income tax consequences of payments you make to a 
relocation services company.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.10  What must we consider in deciding whether to use the fixed-fee or cost-reimbursable contracting method?

    You must consider the following factors in deciding which 
contracting method to use:
    (a) Risk of alternative methods. Under a fixed fee contract, the 
relocation services company bears all risks not expressly contained in 
the contract. Under a cost-reimbursable contract, you must assume some 
or all risks and, therefore, must assume some management 
responsibilities under the contract as well. For example, under a fixed 
fee homesale program you are not directly liable for losses incurred if 
a residence does not sell immediately, while under a cost-reimbursable 
homesale program you assume some or all risks of selling the residence.
    (b) Cost of alternative methods. Under the fixed fee method of 
contracting, the fee includes a cost component for risk assumed by the 
relocation services company. Under the cost-reimbursable method of 
contracting, you are directly responsible for some or all of the costs 
associated with management of the contract. In deciding whether to use 
cost-reimbursable contracting you, therefore, must consider the cost of 
resources you would require (including personnel costs) to manage a 
cost-reimbursable relocation services contract.
    (c) Effect on the obligation of funds. You must obligate funds for a 
relocation in the fiscal year in which the purchase order is awarded 
under the contract. Under the fixed fee contracting method, the amount 
of the relocation services fee is fixed and you have a basis for 
determining the amount of funds to obligate. Under the cost-reimbursable 
contracting method, you must obligate funds based on an estimate of the 
costs that will be incurred. When opting for cost-reimbursable 
contracting you, therefore, should establish a reliable method of 
computing fund obligation estimates.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.11  May we take title to an employee s residence?

    No, you may not take title to an employee's residence except as 
specifically provided by statute. The statutes which form the basis for 
the provisions of this part do not provide such authority.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.12  Under a homesale program, may we establish a maximum home value above which we will not pay for homesale services?

    Yes. If a home exceeding the maximum value is sold under your 
homesale

[[Page 224]]

program, the employee will be responsible for any additional costs. You 
must establish a maximum amount commensurate with your agency's 
experience. You may consider, among other factors, budgetary 
constraints, the value range of homes in areas where you have offices, 
and the value range of homes previously entered in your program.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.13  Under a homesale program, may we pay an employee for losses he/she incurs on the sale of a residence?

    No. But, this does not preclude your reimbursing a relocation 
services company for losses incurred while the contractor holds the 
property.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.14  Under a homesale program, may we direct the relocation services company to pay an employee more than the fair market value of his/her residence?

    No. Under a homesale program you may not direct the relocation 
services company to pay an employee more than the fair market value (as 
determined by the residence appraisal process) of his/her home.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.15  May we use a relocation services contract for services which we are contractually bound to obtain under another travel services contract?

    No. For example, you may not use a relocation services contract to 
circumvent the travel and transportation expense payment system contract 
if you are a user of that contract.


<R04>
       Subpart B--Employee's Use of a Relocation Services Company

    Note to subpart B: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.100  Am I eligible to use a relocation services company?

    Yes, if you are an employee who is authorized to transfer.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.101  Must my agency allow me to use a relocation services company?

    No. Your agency determines if you may use a relocation services 
company.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.102  Under what conditions may I use a relocation services company?

    You may use a relocation services company if:
    (a) You meet all conditions required for you to be eligible for an 
allowance contained in this chapter for which a service provided by the 
relocation services company would serve as a substitute, and you are 
authorized to use a specific relocation service provided by the company 
as a substitute;
    (b) You have signed a service agreement; and
    (c) You meet any specific conditions your agency has established.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.103  For what relocation services expenses will my agency pay?

    Your agency will pay the relocation services company s fees/expenses 
for the services you are authorized to use. If your agency pays the 
relocation services company for actual expenses the company incurs on 
your behalf, payment to the company is limited to what you would have 
received under the direct reimbursement provisions of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.104  If I use a contracted-for relocation service that is a substitute for reimbursable relocation allowance, will I be reimbursed for the 
          relocation allowance as well?

    No.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.105  What expenses will my agency pay if I use a relocation services company to ship household goods in excess of the maximum weight allowance?

    Your agency will pay the portion of the fee attributable to 18,000 
pounds net weight. You must pay the rest.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.106  What expenses will my agency pay if I use a relocation services company to sell or purchase a residence for which I and/or a member(s) of my 
          immediate family do not have full title?

    Your agency will pay the portion of the relocation services 
company's fee attributable to your pro rata share of the residence, as 
determined in accordance with Sec. 302-6.1(f) of this chapter.

[[Page 225]]

You must pay any portion of the fee attributable to other than your pro 
rata share of the residence.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.107  If my agency authorizes me to enter a homesale program, must I accept a buyout offer from the relocation services company?

    No. Your agency must give you the option to accept or reject an 
offer from the relocation services company.


<R05>
Sec. 302-12.108  What are the income tax consequences if I use a relocation services company?

    You may incur income taxes on relocation services provided by a 
relocation services company and paid for by your agency. Section 82 of 
the Internal Revenue Code states there shall be included in gross income 
(as compensation for services) any amount received or accrued, directly 
or indirectly, by an individual as a payment for or reimbursement of 
expenses of moving from one residence to another residence which is 
attributable to employment. You will receive a relocation income tax 
(RIT) allowance if your agency determines that such expenses are 
taxable. The Government does not assume responsibility for payment of 
your taxes, however, and you may wish to consult a tax professional on 
income tax reporting.


<R03>
PART 302-14--HOME MARKETING INCENTIVE PAYMENTS--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R04>
             Subpart A--Payment of Incentive to the Employee

Sec.
302-14.1  What is a ``homesale program''?
302-14.2  What is the purpose of a home marketing incentive payment?
302-14.3  Am I eligible to receive a home marketing incentive payment?
302-14.4  Must my agency pay me a home marketing incentive?
302-14.5  Under what circumstances will I receive a home marketing 
          incentive payment?
302-14.6  How much may my agency pay me for a home marketing incentive?
302-14.7  Are there tax consequences when I receive a home marketing 
          incentive payment?

                   Subpart B--Agency Responsibilities

302-14.100  How should we administer our home marketing incentive 
          payment program?
302-14.101  What policies must we establish to govern our home marketing 
          incentive payment program?
302-14.102  What factors should we consider in determining whether to 
          establish a home marketing incentive payment program?
302-14.103  What factors should we consider in determining the amount of 
          a home marketing incentive payment?

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5756.

    Source: FTR Amdt. 61, 62 FR 13763, Mar. 21, 1997, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
             Subpart A--Payment of Incentive to the Employee

    Note to subpart A: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-14.1  What is a ``homesale program''?

    It is a program offered by an agency through a contractual 
arrangement with a relocation services company. The relocation services 
company purchases a transferred employee s residence at fair market 
(appraised) value and then independently markets and sells the 
residence.


<R05>
Sec. 302-14.2  What is the purpose of a home marketing incentive payment?

    To reduce the Government s relocation costs by encouraging 
transferred employees who participate in their employing agency s 
homesale program to independently and aggressively market, and find a 
bona fide buyer for, their residence. This significantly reduces the 
fees/expenses their agencies must pay to relocation services companies 
and effectively lowers the cost of such programs.


<R05>
Sec. 302-14.3  Am I eligible to receive a home marketing incentive payment?

    Yes, if you are an employee who is authorized to transfer and you 
otherwise meet requirements for sale of your residence at Government 
expense.

[[Page 226]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-14.4  Must my agency pay me a home marketing incentive?

    No. Your agency determines when it is in the Government s interest 
to offer you a home marketing incentive.


<R05>
Sec. 302-14.5  Under what circumstances will I receive a home marketing incentive payment?

    You will receive a home marketing incentive payment when:
    (a) You enter your residence in your agency s homesale program;
    (b) You independently and aggressively market your residence;
    (c) You find a bona fide buyer for your residence as a result of 
your independent marketing efforts;
    (d) You transfer the residence to the relocation services company;
    (e) Your agency pays a reduced fee/expenses to the relocation 
services company as a result of your independent marketing efforts; and
    (f) You meet any additional conditions your agency has established, 
including but not limited to, mandatory marketing periods, list price 
guidelines, closing requirements, and residence value caps.


<R05>
Sec. 302-14.6  How much may my agency pay me for a home marketing incentive?

    Your agency determines the amount of your home marketing incentive 
payment. The incentive payment, however, may not exceed the lesser of:
    (a) Five percent of the price the relocation services company paid 
when it purchased the residence from you; or
    (b) The savings your agency realized from the reduced fee/expenses 
it paid as a result of your finding a bona fide buyer.


<R05>
Sec. 302-14.7  Are there tax consequences when I receive a home marketing incentive payment?

    Yes, the home marketing incentive payment is considered income. 
Consequently, you will be taxed, and your agency will withhold income 
and employment taxes, on the home marketing incentive payment. You will 
not, however, receive a withholding tax allowance (WTA) to offset the 
withholding on your home marketing incentive payment, nor will you 
receive a relocation income tax (RIT) allowance payment for 
substantially all of your Federal, state and local income taxes on the 
incentive payment.


<R04>
                   Subpart B--Agency Responsibilities

    Note to subpart B: Use of the pronouns ``we'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 302-14.100  How should we administer our home marketing incentive payment program?

    Your goal in using an incentive payment program is to reduce your 
overall relocation costs. You must not make a home marketing incentive 
payment that exceeds the savings you realize from the reduced fees/
expenses you pay the relocation services company.


<R05>
Sec. 302-14.101  What policies must we establish to govern our home marketing incentive payment program?

    You must establish policies to govern:
    (a) The conditions under which you will authorize a home marketing 
incentive payment for an employee;
    (b) The amount of the home marketing incentive payment(s) you will 
offer (or the method you will use to compute your home marketing 
incentive payments); and
    (c) Who will determine in each case whether a home marketing 
incentive payment is authorized.


<R05>
Sec. 302-14.102  What factors should we consider in determining whether to establish a home marketing incentive payment program?

    You should consider:
    (a) Whether the program will increase the percentage of residences 
sold for which employees find a bona fide buyer. You should establish a 
benchmark for the percentage of residences for which you expect 
employees to find a bona fide buyer resulting in lower homesale costs to 
you. If your historical percentage of employee-generated sales is below 
your benchmark, a home marketing incentive payment program may benefit 
you.
    (b) The expected net savings from a home marketing incentive payment 
program.

[[Page 227]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-14.103  What factors should we consider in determining the amount of a home marketing incentive payment?

    You should consider:
    (a) Amount of savings from reduced fee/expenses paid to the 
relocation services company. The home marketing incentive payment 
program is intended to reduce your relocation costs. The amount of each 
home marketing incentive payment you make, therefore, must not exceed 
the savings you realize from the reduced fee you pay to the relocation 
services company.
    (b) Employee's efforts in marketing the residence. The purpose of a 
home marketing incentive payment program is to encourage a transferred 
employee who participates in a homesale program to independently and 
aggressively market his/her residence and find a bona fide buyer.


<R03>
PART 302-15--ALLOWANCE FOR PROPERTY MANAGEMENT SERVICES Pt. 302-15--Table of Contents

<R05>


                Subpart A--General Rules for the Employee

Sec.
302-15.1  What are ``property management services''?
302-15.2  What is a ``nonforeign area''?
302-15.3  What is a ``foreign area''?
302-15.4  What are the purposes of the allowance for property management 
          services?
302-15.5  In what situations may my agency authorize payment for 
          property management services?
302-15.6  Must my agency authorize payment for property management 
          services?
302-15.7  What are the income tax consequences when my agency pays for 
          my property management services?
302-15.8  Who is not eligible for payment for property management 
          services?

   Subpart B--Payment for Property Management Services for Employees 
               Transferred to a Foreign Area Post of Duty

302-15.100  Am I eligible for payment for property management services 
          under this subpart?
302-15.101  Will my agency pay for property management services when I 
          transfer to a foreign area post of duty?
302-15.102  For what property may my agency authorize payment under this 
          subpart?
302-15.103  How long may my agency pay under this subpart?
302-15.104  If my agency is paying for property management services 
          under this subpart and my service agreement expires, what must 
          I do to ensure that payment for property management services 
          continues?
302-15.105  Must I repay property management expenses my agency paid 
          under this subpart if I elect to sell my nonforeign area 
          residence at Government expense when I am transferred from my 
          current foreign area post of duty to a different nonforeign 
          area official station than the one I left?

   Subpart C--Payment for Property Management Services for Employees 
          Transferred to a Nonforeign Area From a Foreign Area

302-15.200  Am I eligible for payment for property management services 
          under this subpart?
302-15.201  Under what circumstances will my agency authorize payment 
          under this subpart?
302-15.202  When my agency authorizes payment for me under this subpart, 
          am I obligated to use such services, or may I elect instead to 
          sell my residence at Government expense?
302-15.203  For what property may my agency authorize payment under this 
          subpart?
302-15.204  How long may my agency pay under this subpart?
302-15.205  If my agency authorized, and I elected to receive, payment 
          under this subpart, may I later elect to sell my residence at 
          Government expense?

                   Subpart D--Agency Responsibilities

302-15.300  What governing policies must we establish for the allowance 
          for property management services?

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5738; 20 U.S.C. 905(a); E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13474, 
3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: FTR Amdt. 60, 62 FR 13761, Mar. 21, 1997, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
                Subpart A--General Rules for the Employee

    Note to subpart A: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.

[[Page 228]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.1  What are ``property management services''?

    ``Property management services'' are programs provided by private 
companies for a fee, which help an employee to manage his/her residence 
at the old official station as a rental property. These services 
typically include, but are not limited to, obtaining a tenant, 
negotiating the lease, inspecting the property regularly, managing 
repairs and maintenance, enforcing lease terms, collecting the rent, 
paying the mortgage and other carrying expenses from rental proceeds 
and/or funds of the employee, and accounting for the transactions and 
providing periodic reports to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.2  What is a ``nonforeign area''?

    A ``nonforeign area'' is the United States, its territories or 
possessions, the Commonwealths of Puerto Rico or the Northern Mariana 
Islands, or the former Canal Zone area (i.e., areas and installations in 
the Republic of Panama made available to the United States pursuant to 
the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 and related agreements (as described in 
22 U.S.C. 3602(a))).


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.3  What is a ``foreign area''?

    A ``foreign area'' means any area that is not a ``nonforeign area'', 
as defined in Sec. 302-15.2.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.4  What are the purposes of the allowance for property management services?

    The purpose is to reduce overall Government relocation costs when 
used instead of sale of the employee's residence at Government expense. 
When authorized in connection with an employee's transfer to a foreign 
area post of duty, the purpose is to relieve the employee of the costs 
of maintaining a home in a nonforeign area while stationed at a foreign 
area post of duty.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.5  In what situations may my agency authorize payment for property management services?

    Your agency may authorize payment when:
    (a) You transfer in the interest of the Government to a foreign area 
post of duty; or
    (b) You are transferred back to a different nonforeign area official 
station than the one you left when you were transferred to a foreign 
area, and you are otherwise eligible for the sale of your residence at 
Government expense.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.6  Must my agency authorize payment for property management services?

    No, your agency determines when it is in the Government's interest 
to authorize payment for these services and what procedures you must 
follow when it authorizes such payment.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.7  What are the income tax consequences when my agency pays for my property management services?

    You will be taxed on the amount of expenses your agency pays for 
property management services whether it reimburses you directly or 
whether it pays a relocation services company to manage your residence. 
Your agency must pay you a relocation income tax (RIT) allowance for the 
additional Federal, State and local income taxes you incur on property 
management expenses it reimburses you or pays on your behalf. You may 
wish to consult with a tax advisor to determine whether you will incur 
any additional tax liability, unrelated to your agency's payment of your 
property management expenses, as a result of maintaining your residence 
as a rental property.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.8  Who is not eligible for payment for property management services?

    New appointees, employees assigned under the Government Employees 
Training Act (5 U.S.C. 4109), and employees transferring wholly within a 
nonforeign area.


<R04>
   Subpart B--Payment for Property Management Services for Employees 
               Transferred to a Foreign Area Post of Duty

    Note to subpart B:  Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the employee.

[[Page 229]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.100  Am I eligible for payment for property management services under this subpart?

    Yes, when your transfer to a foreign area post of duty is in the 
interest of the Government and you and/or a member(s) of your immediate 
family hold title to a residence which you would be eligible to sell at 
Government expense under part 302-6 or 302-12 of this chapter if you 
were transferred to or within a nonforeign area.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.101  Will my agency pay for property management services when I transfer to a foreign area post of duty?

    Yes, when:
    (a) Your agency authorizes payment for your property management 
services;
    (b) You have signed a service agreement; and
    (c) You meet any additional conditions that your agency has 
established.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.102  For what property may my agency authorize payment under this subpart?

    Payment may be authorized only on your residence at the last 
nonforeign area official station from which you transferred to a foreign 
area post of duty.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.103  How long may my agency pay under this subpart?

    Your agency may pay from the time you transfer to a foreign area 
post of duty until one of the following occurs:
    (a) You transfer back to an official station in a nonforeign area;
    (b) You complete a service agreement at your post of duty and remain 
there, but do not sign a new service agreement; or
    (c) You separate from Government service.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.104  If my agency is paying for property management services under this subpart and my service agreement expires, what must I do to ensure that 
          payment for property management services continues?

    You must sign a new service agreement.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.105  Must I repay property management expenses my agency paid under this subpart if I elect to sell my nonforeign area residence at Government 

          expense when I am transferred from my current foreign area 
          post of duty to a different nonforeign area official station 
          than the one I left?

    No. The authority for your agency to pay for property management 
services under this subpart when you are transferred to a foreign area 
is separate from, and in addition to, the authority to sell your 
residence at Government expense under part 302-6 or 302-12 of this 
chapter, or to pay property management services under subpart C of this 
part.


<R04>
   Subpart C--Payment for Property Management Services for Employees 
    Transferred to a Nonforeign Area From a Foreign Area to Subpart C

    Note: Use of the pronouns ``I'' and ``you'' throughout this subpart 
refers to the employee.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.200  Am I eligible for payment for property management services under this subpart?

    Yes, when:
    (a) You transfer in the interest of the Government back to a 
different nonforeign area official station than the one you left when 
you transferred to a foreign area; and
    (b) You and/or a member(s) of your immediate family hold title to a 
residence which you are eligible to sell at Government expense under 
part 302-6 or 302-12 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.201  Under what circumstances will my agency authorize payment under this subpart?

    Your agency will authorize payment under this subpart when:
    (a) Your agency has determined that payment for property management 
services is more advantageous and cost effective for the Government than 
sale of your residence;
    (b) You have signed a service agreement incident to your transfer 
back to a nonforeign area; and
    (c) You meet any additional conditions that your agency has 
established.

[[Page 230]]


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.202  When my agency authorizes payment for me under this subpart, am I obligated to use such services, or may I elect instead to sell my residence 
          at Government expense?

    You are not obligated to use your authorized property management 
services allowance. You have the option of choosing to sell your 
residence at Government expense or to use the property management 
services allowance.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.203  For what property may my agency authorize payment under this subpart?

    Your agency may authorize payment only on your residence at the old 
nonforeign area official station.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.204  How long may my agency pay under this subpart?

    Your agency may pay for a period not to exceed two years from your 
effective date of transfer.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.205  If my agency authorized, and I elected to receive, payment under this subpart, may I later elect to sell my residence at Government expense?

    Yes, provided:
    (a) Your agency allows you to change your election of payment for 
property management expenses to an election of sale of your residence at 
Government expense; and
    (b) Payment for the sale of your residence at Government expense is 
offset in accordance with your agency's policy established under 
Sec. 302-15.300(d).


<R04>
                   Subpart D--Agency Responsibilities

    Note to subpart D: Use of the pronouns ``we'' and ``you'' throughout 
this subpart refers to the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 302-15.300  What governing policies must we establish for the allowance for property management services?

    You must establish policies and procedures governing:
    (a) When you will authorize payment for property management services 
for an employee who transfers to a foreign area post of duty;
    (b) Who will determine whether payment for property management 
services is appropriate when an employee transfers to a foreign area 
post of duty;
    (c) The circumstances under which you will authorize an employee who 
is eligible under this part for property management services to elect 
the use of property management services instead of the sale of his/her 
residence at Government expense under part 302-6 or 302-12 of this 
chapter;
    (d) Who will determine whether payment for property management 
services is more advantageous and cost effective than sale of an 
employee's residence at Government expense;
    (e) If and when you will allow an employee who was offered and 
accepted payment for property management services under subpart C of 
this part to change his/her mind and elect instead to sell his/her 
residence at Government expense, and who will make that determination; 
and
    (f) How you will offset expenses you have paid for property 
management services against payable expenses for sale of the employee's 
residence when an eligible employee who elected payment for property 
management services later changes his/her mind and elects instead to 
sell his/her residence at Government expense.

[[Page 231]]


<R02>
CHAPTER 303--PAYMENT OF EXPENSES CONNECTED WITH THE DEATH OF CERTAIN EMPLOYEES


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

Part                                                                Page
303-1           General.....................................         232
303-2           Allowances..................................         233

[[Page 232]]


<R03>
PART 303-1--GENERAL--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
303-1.1  Authority, coverage, and applicability.
303-1.2  Responsibility.
303-1.3  Definitions.
303-1.4  Death related to performance of official duty.
303-1.5  Death during a period of absence from duty.
303-1.6  Escort for remains.
303-1.7  Method of payment.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5721-5734, 5741-5742; E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13747, 3 
CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: 54 FR 20351, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 303-1.1  Authority, coverage, and applicability.

    (a) Statutory Authority. This chapter sets forth the allowable 
expenses, not otherwise provided for by law, authorized by 5 U.S.C. 
5742(b) for the preparation and transportation of the remains of a 
deceased employee, and for the transportation of the immediate family 
and household goods of a deceased employee.
    (b) Persons covered. The provisions of this chapter cover an 
employee who dies while:
    (1) On official travel away from his/her official station in the 
United States.
    (2) Performing official duties outside CONUS.
    (3) Absent from duty as provided in Sec. 303-1.5.
    (4) Reassigned away from his/her home of record pursuant to a 
mandatory mobility agreement executed as a condition of employment.
    (c) Applicability. The provisions of this chapter apply whether an 
employee's death is or is not work-related.

[FTR Amdt. 22, 56 FR 57289, Nov. 8, 1991, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 
FR 28637, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 303-1.2  Responsibility.

    It is the responsibility of the head of an agency or his/her 
designated representative upon being informed of an employee's death 
which occurred while in any status subject to the provisions of this 
subtitle, immediately to inform the decedent's next of kin or legal 
representative of the provisions of this chapter. The agency head or 
his/her designated representative shall render every reasonable 
assistance in arranging for preparation and transportation of the 
remains of the decedent when death occurs during a travel status or at 
the official station outside CONUS. Also, the agency head or his/her 
designated representative shall provide necessary assistance for the 
return of the decedent's immediate family and household goods to the 
official residence when the decedent's official station was outside the 
continental United States.

[54 FR 20351, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 22, 56 FR 57290, 
Nov. 8, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28637, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 303-1.3  Definitions.

    As used in this chapter, and unless otherwise specifically provided 
in this chapter, the following definitions apply:
    (a) United States. United States means the 50 States and the 
District of Columbia.
    (b) Continental United States. The continental United States (or 
CONUS) means the 48 contiguous States and the District of Columbia.

[FTR Amdt. 22, 56 FR 57290, Nov. 8, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 303-1.4  Death related to performance of official duty.

    When an employee's death results from injuries sustained while he/
she was actually performing official duty, the expenses for preparation 
and transportation of the remains will be properly payable under the 
provisions of 5 U.S.C. 8134. The authorized allowances may not be denied 
because of the deceased employee's entitlement to burial benefits as a 
veteran of the Armed Forces of the United States.

[54 FR 20351, May 10, 1989. Redesignated by FTR Amdt. 22, 56 FR 57289, 
Nov. 8, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 303-1.5  Death during a period of absence from duty.

    The provisions of this chapter apply when an employee is performing 
official travel away from his/her official station located in the United 
States and dies while temporarily absent from a temporary duty station. 
The provisions of this chapter also apply when

[[Page 233]]

an employee is performing official duties outside CONUS and dies while 
temporarily absent from his official station or temporary duty station 
outside CONUS. If the temporary absence is for the purpose of taking 
leave or occurs during nonworkdays, the allowable cost for the 
transportation of remains shall not exceed the amount which would have 
been allowed if death had occurred at the temporary duty station or at 
the official station outside CONUS.

[FTR Amdt. 22, 56 FR 57290, Nov. 8, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 303-1.6  Escort for remains.

    Travel expenses of an escort for the decedent are not allowable.


<R05>
Sec. 303-1.7  Method of payment.

    Payment of allowable expenses may be made direct to the person 
performing the services or by reimbursement to any person making the 
original payment. Claims for reimbursement shall be supported by 
receipts. When the remains are transported by common carrier via express 
service through the use of a Standard Form 1103, U.S. Government Bill of 
Lading, or through the use of a Standard Form 1169, U.S. Government 
Transportation Request, payment shall be made on the appropriate voucher 
forms.

[54 FR 20351, May 10, 1989. Redesignated by FTR Amdt. 22, 56 FR 57289, 
Nov. 8, 1991]


<R03>
PART 303-2--ALLOWANCES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
303-2.1  Preparation of employee remains.
303-2.2  Allowable costs for preparation of remains.
303-2.3  Transportation of employee remains.
303-2.4  Transportation of remains of a member of an employee's 
          immediate family.
303-2.5  Allowable costs for transportation of employee remains.
303-2.6  Transportation of the immediate family and household goods.
303-2.7  Transportation of baggage.
303-2.8  Prohibition of payment when other laws apply.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5721-5734, 5741-5742; E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13747, 3 
CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: 54 FR 20352, May 10, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 303-2.1  Preparation of employee remains.

    The amount allowed for preparing the remains of an employee who dies 
while traveling on official business within the continental United 
States is limited to $250. When death occurs during a travel status 
outside the continental United States or at the official station outside 
CONUS, the head of the agency concerned or his/her designated 
representative shall allow actual costs for preparation of the remains 
of an employee.

[54 FR 20352, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 22, 56 FR 57290, 
Nov. 8, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 303-2.2  Allowable costs for preparation of remains.

    Allowable costs for preparation of remains are as follows:
    (a) Costs of embalming or cremation;
    (b) Necessary clothing;
    (c) Casket or container suitable for shipment to place of interment; 
and
    (d) Expenses necessarily incurred in complying with local laws and 
laws at the port of entry in the United States applicable to the 
preparation of remains for transportation and burial.


<R05>
Sec. 303-2.3  Transportation of employee remains.

    (a) Death while performing official travel within the continental 
United States. When an employee dies while performing official travel 
within CONUS, payment is authorized for the cost of transporting the 
remains to the employee's place of actual residence, official station, 
or place of interment. The cost of transportation shall not exceed the 
cost to the place of actual residence or official station, whichever is 
more distant.
    (b) Death while performing official duties outside the continental 
United States. When an employee dies while performing official duties 
outside CONUS, payment is authorized for the cost of transporting the 
remains to the employee's place of actual residence, official station, 
or place of interment. The cost of transportation shall not exceed the 
cost to the place of actual residence or official station, whichever is 
more distant.

[FTR Amdt. 22, 56 FR 57290, Nov. 8, 1991]

[[Page 234]]


<R05>
Sec. 303-2.4  Transportation of remains of a member of an employee's immediate family.

    Under the authority of 5 U.S.C. 5742(c), the head of an agency may 
authorize payment for transportation of remains of a member of an 
employee's immediate family who dies while residing with an employee 
stationed outside the continental United States.


<R05>
Sec. 303-2.5  Allowable costs for transportation of employee remains.

    (a) By common carrier. The allowable costs for transportation of 
remains by common carrier include the costs of:
    (1) Movement from place of death to a mortuary;
    (2) Shipping permits;
    (3) Outside case for shipment of remains (including the sealing of 
the shipping case when necessary);
    (4) Removal to common carrier;
    (5) Transportation of the remains by common carrier; and
    (6) One removal from the common carrier.
    (b) By hearse or means other than common carrier. Charges for 
transportation of remains overland by hearse or means other than common 
carrier shall not exceed the cost of common carrier transportation. 
Reimbursable costs include the cost of hearse or means other than common 
carrier plus ferry fares, bridge tolls, and similar charges. An 
allowance for an outside shipping case is not authorized for this 
conveyance.


<R05>
Sec. 303-2.6  Transportation of the immediate family and household goods.

    (a) While performing duties outside CONUS--(1) General. The cost of 
return transportation of the immediate family and the baggage and 
household goods of the decedent and his/her immediate family shall be 
allowed when an employee dies while he/she is performing official duties 
outside CONUS, or while he/she is in transit to or from that place. 
Allowable transportation costs shall not exceed the costs of returning 
the immediate family and the baggage and household goods from the place 
where the official duties were performed or were to be performed, by the 
most direct route, to the decedent's place of actual residence, or to 
any other place as the head of the agency concerned or his/her 
designated representative may designate, provided the cost to the 
Government shall not exceed the cost of transportation to the decedent's 
place of actual residence.
    (2) Time limitations. Travel of the immediate family and shipment of 
household goods must be undertaken within 1 year from the date of death 
of the employee, except that an extension of the time for shipment of 
household goods may be granted by the head of the agency or his/her 
designated representative if requested prior to the expiration of the 1-
year limit.
    (3) Transportation of immediate family. The transportation of the 
immediate family is subject to the provisions of part 302-2 of this 
subtitle.
    (4) Transportation of household goods. The costs allowed for the 
transportation of household goods are limited to those prescribed in 
Secs. 302-8.2 and 302-8.4 of this title. Reference to ``employee'' in 
Sec. 302-8.4(e) of this title shall mean the deceased employee's legal 
representative or a member of his/her immediate family when the term is 
used in connection with the transportation of the household goods of a 
deceased employee.
    (b) While stationed in the continental United States. When an 
employee stationed in the continental United States dies while on 
temporary duty, transportation expenses shall not be authorized for his/
her immediate family or his/her household goods. The deceased employee's 
baggage at the temporary duty point shall be transported at Government 
expense to his/her official station or place of actual residence.

[54 FR 20352, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 22, 56 FR 57290, 
Nov. 8, 1991; FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28637, June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 303-2.7  Transportation of baggage.

    The allowable cost for transportation of personal baggage other than 
household goods shall include the expenses actually and necessarily 
incurred in transporting personal baggage as prescribed in part 301-5 of 
this subtitle. Expenses in connection with the transportation of baggage 
by a privately owned conveyance which would not have been incurred if 
the baggage had been transported by common carrier

[[Page 235]]

shall not be allowed. Reimbursement for loss or damage to baggage during 
transit shall not be allowed, nor shall charges for marine and other 
insurance be allowed.

[54 FR 20352, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28637, 
June 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 303-2.8  Prohibition of payment when other laws apply.

    Payment of allowances provided by this chapter shall not be made if 
payment is authorized by any other law of the United States. However, 
the allowances provided by this chapter shall not be denied because the 
deceased employee is eligible for burial benefits as a veteran of the 
Armed Forces of the United States.

[54 FR 20352, May 10, 1989, as amended by FTR Amdt. 22, 56 FR 57290, 
Nov. 8, 1991]

[[Page 237]]


<R02>
   CHAPTER 304--PAYMENT FROM A NON-FEDERAL SOURCE FOR TRAVEL EXPENSES


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

Part                                                                Page
304-1           Acceptance of Payment from a non-Federal 
                    source for travel expenses..............         238
304-2           Reductions in meeting and training allowance 
                    payments................................         243

[[Page 238]]


<R03>
PART 304-1--ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT FROM A NON-FEDERAL SOURCE FOR TRAVEL EXPENSES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
304-1.1  Authority.
304-1.2  General.
304-1.3  Policy.
304-1.4  Conditions for acceptance.
304-1.5  Conflict-of-interest analysis.
304-1.6  Payment guidelines.
304-1.7  Reimbursement claims for official travel expenses.
304-1.8  Limitations and penalties.
304-1.9  Reports.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5701-5709; 31 U.S.C. 1353; E.O. 11609, 36 FR 
13747, 3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: 57 FR 53289, Nov. 9, 1992, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 304-1.1  Authority.

    This part is issued under the authority of 31 U.S.C. 1353 and 5 
U.S.C. 5701-5709.


<R05>
Sec. 304-1.2  General.

    (a) Applicability. This part applies to agency acceptance of payment 
from a non-Federal source for travel, subsistence, and related expenses 
with respect to the attendance of an employee in a travel status (and/or 
the accompanying spouse of such employee when applicable) at any meeting 
or similar function relating to the official duties of the employee. 
This part does not authorize acceptance of such payments by an employee 
or the accompanying spouse of an employee in his/her personal capacity 
(see, however, Sec. 304-1.8(a)).
    (b) Solicitation prohibited. An employee shall not solicit payment 
for travel, subsistence, and related expenses from a non-Federal source. 
However, after receipt of an invitation from a non-Federal source to 
attend a meeting or similar function or in the course of discussions of 
an event to be sponsored jointly by the agency and the non-Federal 
source, the agency or employee may inform the non-Federal source of this 
authority.
    (c) Definitions. As used in this part, the following definitions 
apply:
    (1) Agency. ``Agency'' means an executive agency as defined in 5 
U.S.C. 105, and includes an independent agency as well as an agency 
within the Executive Office of the President.
    (2) Employee. ``Employee'' means an appointed officer or employee of 
an agency, including a special Government employee as defined in 18 
U.S.C. 202, or an expert or consultant appointed under the authority of 
5 U.S.C. 3109.
    (3) Meeting or similar function. ``Meeting or similar function'' 
means a conference, seminar, speaking engagement, symposium, training 
course, or similar event that takes place away from the employee's 
official station, and is sponsored or cosponsored by a non-Federal 
source. This term does not include a meeting or other event required to 
carry out an agency's statutory or regulatory functions (i.e., a 
function that is essential to an agency's mission), such as 
investigations, inspections, audits, site visits, negotiations, or 
litigation. The term also does not include promotional vendor training 
or other meetings held for the primary purpose of marketing the non-
Federal source's products or services. A meeting or similar function 
need not be widely attended for purposes of this definition, and 
includes but is not limited to the following:
    (i) An event at which the employee will participate as a speaker or 
panel participant, including an event at which the employee will give an 
oral presentation focusing on his/her official duties or on the 
policies, programs, or operations of the agency;
    (ii) A conference, convention, seminar, symposium or similar event 
the primary purpose of which is to receive training other than 
promotional vendor training, or to present or exchange substantive 
information concerning a subject of mutual interest to a number of 
parties;
    (iii) An event at which the employee will receive an award or 
honorary degree, which is in recognition of meritorious public service 
that is related to the employee's official duties, and which may be 
accepted by the employee consistent with the applicable standards of 
conduct regulation.
    (4) Non-Federal source. ``Non-Federal source'' means any person or 
entity other than the Government of the United States. The term includes 
any

[[Page 239]]

individual, private or commercial entity, nonprofit organization or 
association or international or multinational organization (irrespective 
of whether an agency holds membership in the organization or 
association), or foreign, state, or local government (including the 
government of the District of Columbia).
    (5) Payment. ``Payment'' means funds paid by a non-Federal source 
for travel, subsistence, and related expenses by check or similar 
instrument to an agency, or payment in kind.
    (6) Payment in kind. ``Payment in kind'' means goods, services, or 
other benefits provided by a non-Federal source for travel, subsistence, 
and related expenses in lieu of funds paid to an agency by check or 
similar instrument for the same purpose.
    (7) Travel, subsistence, and related expenses. ``Travel, subsistence 
and related expenses'' means the same types of expenses payable under 
chapter 301 of this subtitle or analogous provisions of chapter 100 of 
Volume 6 of the Foreign Affairs Manual (6 FAM 100) \1\ or Volume 1 of 
the Joint Federal Travel Regulations (JFTR).\2\ Also encompassed in this 
definition are such expenses as conference or training fees (in whole or 
in part) as well as benefits which cannot be paid under the applicable 
travel regulation and which are provided in kind and made available by 
the sponsor(s) to all attendees incident to and for use at the meeting 
or similar function.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Chapter 100 of Volume 6 of the Foreign Affairs Manual (6 FAM 
100) is available from the Department of State, Publishing Services, 
Washington, DC 20520-0854.
    \2\ Volume 1 of the Joint Federal Travel Regulations (JFTR) is 
available from the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing 
Office, Washington, DC 20402.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 304-1.3  Policy.

    (a) Acceptance of payment for employee. As provided in this part, an 
agency may accept payment from a non-Federal source (or authorize an 
employee to receive such payment on its behalf) with respect to 
attendance of the employee at a meeting or similar function which the 
employee has been authorized to attend in an official capacity on behalf 
of the employing agency.
    (b) Acceptance of payment for an accompanying spouse. An agency may 
accept payment under this part from a non-Federal source for an 
accompanying spouse when the spouse's presence at the meeting or similar 
function is in the interest of the agency. A spouse's presence at an 
event may be determined to be in the interest of the agency if the 
spouse will:
    (1) Support the mission of the agency or substantially assist the 
employee in carrying out his/her official duties;
    (2) Attend a ceremony at which the employee will receive an award or 
honorary degree described in Sec. 304-1.2(c)(3); or
    (3) Participate in substantive programs related to the agency's 
programs or operations.
    (c) Administration and delegation of authority. Payment acceptance 
must be in accordance with internal agency procedures. Agencies shall 
ensure that officials delegated authority to determine the propriety of 
accepting payments under this part are at as high an administrative 
level as practical to ensure adequate consideration and review of the 
circumstances surrounding the offer and acceptance of the payment.
    (d) Payment in excess of regulatory limitations--(1) Subsistence 
expenses. When a non-Federal source makes full payment for subsistence 
expenses, acceptance of payment for, and when applicable, reimbursement 
by an agency to, an employee (and/or the accompanying spouse of such 
employee when applicable) under this part are not subject to the maximum 
per diem or actual subsistence expense rates prescribed in chapter 301 
of this subtitle or by the Secretary of Defense in Civilian Personnel 
Per Diem Bulletins published periodically in the Federal Register.
    (2) Transportation expenses. When a non-Federal source makes full 
payment for common carrier transportation expenses, acceptance of 
payment for, and when applicable, reimbursement by an agency to, an 
employee (and/or the accompanying spouse of such employee when 
applicable) under this part are not subject to the transportation class 
of service limitations applicable to premium-class other than

[[Page 240]]

first-class accommodations, as prescribed in chapter 301 of this 
subtitle or the JFTR. Acceptance of payment for first-class 
transportation accommodations is allowed only when the use of first-
class transportation accommodations is authorized in accordance with 
Sec. 301-3.3 of this subtitle.
    (e) Reduced per diem rate in partial payment situation. If the 
designated agency official determines in advance of the travel that a 
payment covers some but not all of the per diem costs to be incurred by 
the employee (and/or the accompanying spouse when applicable), the 
agency should authorize a reduced per diem rate, in accordance with 
Sec. 301-7.12 of this subtitle or analogous provisions of 6 FAM 100 or 
the JFTR, as applicable, that is commensurate with the known subsistence 
expense levels.

[57 FR 53289, Nov. 9, 1992, as amended by FTR Amdt. 32, 58 FR 58244, 
Oct. 29, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 304-1.4  Conditions for acceptance.

    (a) An agency may accept payment for employee and/or spousal travel 
from a non-Federal source when a general authorization to accept payment 
(rather than an item-by-item authorization) is issued in advance of the 
travel following a determination by the agency official designated in 
accordance with Sec. 304-1.3(c) that the payment is:
    (1) For travel relating to an employee's official duties (including 
attendance because the employee's presence at the meeting is necessary 
to permit participation in the meeting by another employee or because a 
spouse's presence at the meeting or similar function is in the interest 
of the agency) under an official travel authorization issued to the 
employee, and to an accompanying spouse when applicable;
    (2) For attendance at a meeting or similar function (as defined in 
Sec. 304-1.2(c)(3) relating to the official duties of the employee; and
    (3) From a non-Federal source that is not disqualified under 
Sec. 304-1.5 on conflict-of-interest grounds.
    (b) Payments may be accepted from multiple sources under paragraph 
(a) of this section.
    (c) If a meeting or similar function does not concern a subject of 
mutual interest to the employee's agency and the non-Federal source, 
acceptance of payment from the non-Federal source under paragraph (a) of 
this section is limited to payment in kind and to the types of services 
the non-Federal source generally provides; e.g., air passenger 
transportation services provided by a commercial airline.


<R05>
Sec. 304-1.5  Conflict-of-interest analysis.

    (a) Payment from a non-Federal source shall not be accepted if the 
authorized agency official determines that acceptance under the 
circumstances would cause a reasonable person with knowledge of all the 
facts relevant to a particular case to question the integrity of agency 
programs or operations. In making this determination, an authorized 
agency official shall be guided by all relevant considerations, 
including, but not limited to:
    (1) The identity of the non-Federal source;
    (2) The purpose of the meeting or similar function;
    (3) The identity of other expected participants;
    (4) The nature and sensitivity of any matter pending at the agency 
affecting the interests of the non-Federal source;
    (5) The significance of the employee's role in any such matter; and
    (6) The monetary value and character of the travel benefits offered 
by the non-Federal source.
    (b) The authorized agency official may find that, while acceptance 
from the non-Federal source is permissible, it is in the interest of the 
agency to qualify acceptance of the offered payment by, for example, 
authorizing attendance at only a portion of the event or limiting the 
type or character of benefits that may be accepted.


<R05>
Sec. 304-1.6  Payment guidelines.

    (a) Payment other than in kind. Payments from a non-Federal source 
for an employee and/or accompanying spouse, other than payments in kind, 
shall be by check or similar instrument made payable to the agency. Any 
such payment received by the employee on behalf of the agency for his/
her travel and/or that of the accompanying spouse is accepted on behalf 
of the agency and is to be submitted as soon

[[Page 241]]

as practicable for credit to the agency appropriation applicable to such 
expenses. When the acceptance of payment has been approved in advance by 
the designated agency official, the agency, or employee on behalf of the 
agency for his/her travel (and/or that of the accompanying spouse, when 
applicable), may, in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 304-1.3(d), 
accept payment in excess of applicable limitations, provided that the 
accommodation or other benefit furnished is comparable in value to that 
offered to, or purchased by, other similarly situated individuals 
attending the meeting or similar function. When the applicable 
limitation will be exceeded, payment should be required in advance of 
the travel.
    (b) Payment in kind. When the acceptance of payment has been 
approved in advance by the designated agency official, the employee, for 
his/her travel (and/or that of the accompanying spouse, when 
applicable), may, in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 304-1.3(d), 
accept payment in kind in excess of applicable limitations, provided 
that the accommodation or other benefit furnished is comparable in value 
to that offered to, or purchased by, other similarly situated 
individuals attending the meeting or similar function.


<R05>
Sec. 304-1.7  Reimbursement claims for official travel expenses.

    (a) The employee (and/or accompanying spouse when applicable) shall 
submit to the employing agency on authorized reimbursement forms all 
travel expense reimbursement claims, and shall itemize all expenses 
incurred which exceed applicable limitations (see Sec. 304-1.3(d)). 
Generally, the employee, and/or accompanying spouse when applicable, 
shall be reimbursed an amount not to exceed applicable limitations. 
However, when the non-Federal source, in accordance with the provisions 
of Sec. 304-1.3(d), makes full payment in excess of applicable 
limitations for reimbursable subsistence expenses or common carrier 
transportation expenses incurred, reimbursement shall be the amount of 
the payment from the non-Federal source. Reimbursement for expenses in 
excess of regulatory limitations shall not in any case exceed the amount 
of the expenses incurred.
    (b) The agency may reimburse the employee (and/or accompanying 
spouse of such employee when applicable) for only the types of expenses 
defined in Secs. 301-7.1 (b)(6) and (c) of this subtitle or in analogous 
provisions of 6 FAM 100 or the JFTR, as applicable, for per diem 
allowances, transportation expenses, or other miscellaneous travel 
expenses.
    (c) If an accepted payment covers only a portion of one or more 
types of the expenses incurred (e.g., $50.00 per night for lodging in a 
locality with an $85.00 per night maximum lodging allowance), the agency 
shall reimburse the employee (and/or accompanying spouse when 
applicable) only the amount to which he/she otherwise would be entitled 
under applicable regulation (chapter 301 of this subtitle, 6 FAM 100, or 
the JFTR). (See Sec. 304-1.3(e) regarding reduced per diem rate 
situations.)
    (d) If an accepted payment covers in full one or more types of 
expenses described in paragraph (b) of this section (e.g., payment for 
lodging accommodations) but does not cover all of the travel expenses 
incurred, the agency shall reimburse the employee (and/or accompanying 
spouse of such employee when applicable) for those expenses that are not 
covered by the payment, not to exceed applicable limitations established 
in chapter 301 of this subtitle or in analogous provisions of 6 FAM 100 
or the JFTR.


<R05>
Sec. 304-1.8  Limitations and penalties.

    (a) This part is the only authority under which an agency may accept 
payment from a non-Federal source, or authorize an employee to accept 
such payment on behalf of the agency, in connection with the attendance 
of its employee (and/or the accompanying spouse of such employee when 
applicable) at a meeting or similar function. An agency may not accept, 
under an agency gift statute or other similar authority, payment for 
travel, subsistence, and related expenses incurred by an employee and/or 
accompanying spouse to attend a meeting or similar function. However, 
nothing in this part prohibits an agency or employee from accepting 
payment as follows:

[[Page 242]]

    (1) When authorized under 5 U.S.C. 4111 or 5 U.S.C. 7342;
    (2) When payment is for travel to be performed for a partisan rather 
than an official purpose in the case of an employee who is exempt from 
the Hatch Act under 5 U.S.C. 7324(d);
    (3) When authorized pursuant to an agency gift statute or similar 
statutory authority and payment is for attendance at or participation in 
an event (other than a meeting or similar function) relating to the 
official duties of the employee; or
    (4) When consistent with the applicable standards of ethical conduct 
regulation concerning personal acceptance of gifts.
    (b) An employee who accepts any payment in violation of this part is 
subject to the following:
    (1) The employee may be required, in addition to any penalty 
provided by law and applicable regulations, to repay for deposit to the 
general fund of the Treasury, an amount equal to the amount of the 
payment so accepted; and
    (2) When repayment is required under paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section, the employee shall not be entitled to any reimbursement from 
the Government for such expenses.


<R05>
Sec. 304-1.9  Reports.

    (a) Agency reports. Each agency shall submit semiannual reports of 
payments (see definition of payment in Sec. 304-1.2(c)) which total more 
than $250 per event, and which have been accepted under this part with 
respect to the attendance at, or participation in, a meeting or similar 
function by an agency employee, and/or accompanying spouse of such 
employee when applicable. Negative reports are required.
    (1) Submission. The head of each agency (or his/her designee) shall 
submit the semiannual report to the Director of the Office of Government 
Ethics (OGE), 1201 New York Avenue, N.W., Suite 500, Washington, DC 
20005-3917. The report shall be based on when payment is received rather 
than when travel is performed, and shall be submitted as follows:
    (i) Not later than May 31 of each year with respect to payments 
received in the preceding period beginning on October 1 and ending on 
March 31; and
    (ii) Not later than November 30 of each year with respect to 
payments received in the preceding period beginning on April 1 and 
ending on September 30.
    (2) Information required. Except as provided in paragraph (a)(6) of 
this section, the report shall specify the following information in the 
order presented:
    (i) The name of the agency submitting the report;
    (ii) Each event (meeting or similar function) for which an agency 
accepts payment under this part of more than $250 for an employee and 
spouse together, or for either the employee or the spouse separately, 
including:
    (A) The sponsor(s) of the event;
    (B) The location of the event;
    (C) The date(s) of the event; and
    (D) The nature of the event;
    (iii) The name of each employee for whom such payment was accepted 
in connection with the event, including:
    (A) The employee's Government position; and
    (B) The employee's travel date(s) in connection with attendance at 
the event;
    (iv) The name of the accompanying spouse, if applicable, for whom 
payment was accepted in connection with the event, including:
    (A) The name of the employee accompanied by the spouse;
    (B) The employee's Government position; and
    (C) The spouse's travel date(s) in connection with attendance at the 
event;
    (v) The identity of any non-Federal source from which payment was 
accepted in connection with the event;
    (vi) An itemization of the benefits accepted by the agency in 
connection with attendance at the event, including for each benefit:
    (A) A description of the benefit, provided that benefits accepted as 
a part of a conference or training fee need not be reported separately;
    (B) The method of payment (payment in kind or by check or similar 
instrument);
    (C) The individual for whom payment was accepted (employee or 
spouse);

[[Page 243]]

    (D) The non-Federal source that provided the benefit; and
    (E) The amount of the payment; and
    (vii) The total value of the payments accepted for the employee and/
or spouse in connection with the event identified as follows:
    (A) The total amount of payments provided by check or similar 
instrument; and
    (B) The total value of payments provided in kind.
    (3) Valuation of payments in kind. In the case of conference, 
training, or similar fees waived or paid by the non-Federal source, 
report the amount charged other participants. In the case of 
transportation or lodging, report the cost to the non-Federal source, or 
indicate the rate that would have been charged a similar non-Federal 
source for a similar benefit at the time the benefit was provided. In 
the case of meals or other benefits that are not provided incident to 
transportation, lodging, or a conference, training, or similar fee, 
report the cost to the non-Federal source or provide a reasonable 
approximation of the market value of the benefit.
    (4) Valuation of noncommercial benefits furnished by a non-Federal 
source--(i) Transportation. In the case of transportation on a 
chartered, corporate or other private aircraft, report the first-class 
rate that would have been charged by an air common carrier at the time 
the transportation was provided or, if common carrier transportation was 
unavailable between the two locations, report the cost of chartering a 
similar aircraft using a commercially available service.
    (ii) Lodging. In the case of lodging for which no commercial rate is 
available, report the maximum lodging rate prescribed in chapter 301 of 
this subtitle; section 925, a per diem supplement to the Standardized 
Regulations (Government Civilians, Foreign Areas); or Civilian Personnel 
Per Diem Bulletins issued by the Secretary of Defense, as applicable.
    (5) Public availability of reports. Except as provided in paragraph 
(a)(6) of this section, the Director of OGE shall make any report filed 
pursuant to this section available for public inspection and copying 
within 30 days after the applicable due date or within 30 days after the 
date OGE actually receives the report, whichever is later.
    (6) Exemption. To the extent that information is protected from 
disclosure by statute, an agency is not required to furnish information 
otherwise required to be reported. Information that may be disclosed 
shall be submitted to OGE and made available to the public in accordance 
with paragraph (a)(5) of this section. Information that is not disclosed 
because it is protected from disclosure by statute shall be made 
available by the reporting agency for review by properly cleared OGE 
personnel.
    (b) Employee reports. Payments properly accepted under this part are 
accepted by the agency. Receipt of a benefit by an employee and/or the 
accompanying spouse, when applicable, on behalf of the agency under the 
authority of this part is not required to be reported as a gift on any 
confidential or public financial disclosure report that the employee is 
required to file pursuant to law or OGE regulation. Acceptance of 
payment by an employee for himself/herself and/or the accompanying 
spouse, when applicable, under authorities other than this part may be 
subject to other reporting requirements such as those required by the 
Ethics in Government Act of 1978, as amended, including reporting the 
payment on the employee's financial disclosure report.


<R03>
PART 304-2--REDUCTIONS IN MEETING AND TRAINING ALLOWANCE PAYMENTS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
304-2.1  Authority.
304-2.2  Applicability.
304-2.3  Conditions for approval of contributions or payments.
304-2.4  Agency responsibilities.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 4111(b); E.O. 11609, 36 FR 13747, 3 CFR, 1971-
1975 Comp., p. 586.

    Source: 56 FR 9881, Mar. 8, 1991, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 304-2.1  Authority.

    This part is issued under the authority of 5 U.S.C. 4111(b).

[[Page 244]]


<R05>
Sec. 304-2.2  Applicability.

    Subject to the exceptions in 5 U.S.C. 4102, this part applies to 
civilian officers and employees of executive agencies, including the 
Department of Defense; independent establishments, as defined in 5 
U.S.C. 104; Government corporations, subject to 31 U.S.C. 9101 et seq.; 
the Library of Congress; the Government Printing Office; the Government 
of the District of Columbia; and commissioned officers of the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. All such officers and employees 
and all such agencies, independent establishments, and departments are 
referred to in this part as ``employees'' or ``agencies,'' as 
appropriate.

[56 FR 9881, Mar. 8, 1991, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28637, June 
26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 304-2.3  Conditions for approval of contributions or payments.

    Section 303(j) of Executive Order 11348 of April 20, 1967, and the 
regulations issued by the Office of Personnel Management under section 
401(b) of that Order, prescribe the conditions under which agency heads 
may approve the acceptance by employees of contributions and awards 
incident to training and payments incident to attendance at meetings, 
under 5 U.S.C. 4111(a), from the organizations described therein. These 
organizations are referred to in this part as ``donors.''

[56 FR 9881, Mar. 8, 1991, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28637, June 
26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 304-2.4  Agency responsibilities.

    Agency heads shall provide adequate safeguards to ensure that the 
following provisions of this section are carried out:
    (a) Where an approved payment by a donor fully covers expenses 
incident to training in a non-Government facility, or travel, 
subsistence, or other expenses incident to attendance at a meeting, the 
agency shall not pay for such expenses or shall recover payments 
previously made in the manner described in paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (b) If an approved payment by a donor does not fully cover expenses 
described in paragraph (a) of this section, the agency may pay an amount 
considered sufficient to cover the balance of the expenses to the extent 
authorized by law and regulation, including 5 U.S.C. 4109 and 4110. If 
an amount in excess of such balance has been previously paid by the 
agency, such amount shall be recovered from the employee in the manner 
described in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (c) Recoveries of payments, as provided in paragraph (b) of this 
section, shall be made in the manner prescribed by regulations of the 
agency concerned and shall be issued according to 5 U.S.C. 5514.
    (d) No reduction in payment by an agency is required where an 
approved contribution or award to an employee covers types of expenses 
which the agency is not authorized to pay. For example, where an agency 
authorizes travel expenses of an employee, including per diem and 
transportation expenses of his/her immediate family and household goods 
and personal effects to a training location, no reduction in payment by 
the agency is required if an approved contribution or award covers 
subsistence expenses of the family en route and expenses incurred by the 
employee in establishing himself/herself and the family at the training 
location.
    (e) Expense data shall be obtained from employees or donors in such 
detail as the agency head deems necessary to carry out the provisions of 
this part.

[56 FR 9881, Mar. 8, 1991, as amended by FTR Amdt. 26, 57 FR 28637, June 
26, 1992]
[[Page 245]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected



[[Page 247]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                      (Revised as of June 20, 1997)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                          Title 2--[Reserved]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)
        II  Federal Claims Collection Standards (General 
                Accounting Office--Department of Justice) (Parts 
                100--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
        IV  Advisory Committee on Federal Pay (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3201)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)

[[Page 248]]

      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Part 7101)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                          Title 6--[Reserved]

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Consumer Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 249]]

        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Northeast Dairy Compact Commission (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of Finance and Management, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  [Reserved]
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)

[[Page 250]]

    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1--499)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Meat and Poultry 
                Inspection, Department of Agriculture (Parts 300--
                599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
        XI  United States Enrichment Corporation (Parts 1100--
                1199)
        XV  Office of the Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural 
                Gas Transportation System (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)

[[Page 251]]

        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board (Parts 
                1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700-1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Export Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)

[[Page 252]]

            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  United States Customs Service, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

[[Page 253]]

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  United States Information Agency (Parts 500--599)
        VI  United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 700--799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Board for International Broadcasting (Parts 1300--
                1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development

[[Page 254]]

         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs and Section 202 Direct Loan Program) 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--999)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1001)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1200)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--799)

[[Page 255]]

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1--299)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--199)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
        VI  Bureau of Mines, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                600--699)

[[Page 256]]

       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)
      XXIX  Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in 
                the Armed Forces (Part 2900)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

[[Page 257]]

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
                Department of Education (Parts 700--799)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100-1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1--299)

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
       XIV  Assassination Records Review Board (Parts 1400-1499)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

[[Page 258]]

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--799)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       301  Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Parts 303-1--303-2)
       304  Payment from a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Health Care Financing Administration, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)

[[Page 259]]

         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10005)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  ACTION (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)

[[Page 260]]

      XXII  Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2299)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  United States Information Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)

[[Page 261]]

        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  Panama Canal Commission (Parts 3500--3599)
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Part 
                5452)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Research and Special Programs Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)

[[Page 262]]

        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            Acts Requiring Publication in the Federal Register
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR



[[Page 263]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                      (Revised as of June 20, 1997)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or
                     Agency                               Chapter

ACTION                                            45, XII
Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental          5, VII
     Relations
Advisory Committee on Federal Pay                 5, IV
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Finance and Management, Office of               7, XXX
  Food and Consumer Service                       7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Alaska Natural Gas Transportation System, Office  10, XV
     of the Federal Inspector
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of          27, I
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII

[[Page 264]]

Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX
Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, United       22, VI
     States
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Assassination Records Review Board                36, XIV
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Board for International Broadcasting              22, XIII
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee        45, XXII
     Commission
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I`
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Export Administration, Bureau of                15, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office                     37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Customs Service, United States                    19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51

[[Page 265]]

  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Defense Mapping Agency                          32, I
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Mapping Agency                            32, I
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Enrichment Corporation, United States             10, XI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                25, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export Administration, Bureau of                  15, VII
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I

[[Page 266]]

  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               4, II
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II; 49, III
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural Gas      10, XV
     Transportation System, Office of
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Pay, Advisory Committee on                5, IV
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Property Management Regulations System    41, Subtitle C
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Finance and Management, Office of                 7, XXX
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Consumer Service                         7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 101, 105
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302

[[Page 267]]

  Travel Allowances                               41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Great Lakes Pilotage                              46, III
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Health Care Financing Administration            42, IV
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Health Care Financing Administration              42, IV
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Naturalization Service            8, I
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Information Agency, United States                 22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Intergovernmental Relations, Advisory Commission  5, VII
     on
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  Mines, Bureau of                                30, VI
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III

[[Page 268]]

  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, Agency for             22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
  International Development, Agency for           22, II; 48, 7
  Overseas Private Investment Corporation         5, XXXIII; 22, VII
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             4, II
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration and Naturalization Service          8, I
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration     29, XXV
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of    41, 61; 20, IX
       the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Mines, Bureau of                                  30, VI
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV

[[Page 269]]

Monetary Offices                                  31, I
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XXV
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Dairy Compact Commission                7, XIII
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Panama Canal Commission                           48, 35
Panama Canal Regulations                          35, I
Patent and Trademark Office                       37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration       29, XXV
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
   Fellowships
[[Page 270]]

Presidential Commission on the Assignment of      32, XXIX
     Women in the Armed Forces
Presidential Documents                            3
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Regional Action Planning Commissions              13, V
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Special Programs Administration      49, I
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
State Department                                  22, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board       12, XV
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     5, L
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II; 49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 49, V
  Research and Special Programs Administration    49, I
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Travel Allowances                                 41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 17, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I

[[Page 271]]

  Customs Service, United States                  19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  International Investment, Office of             31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
United States Enrichment Corporation              10, XI
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of the  41, 61; 20, IX
     Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 273]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations which were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
1986, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.

For the period before January 1, 1986, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, and 1973-1985,'' published in seven 
separate volumes.

                                  1986

41 CFR
                                                                   51 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter 201
201-1.000-1  See Temp. Reg. 13.....................................45887
201-1.102-3  See Temp. Reg. 13.....................................45887
201-1.103  See Temp. Reg. 13.......................................45887
201-2.001  Amended..................................................9958
201-8.100-1  Revised................................................8318
201-8.101-1  Revised................................................8318
201-8.101-2  Revised................................................8319
    Corrected......................................................10392
201-8.101-3  (a) introductory text revised..........................8319
201-8.101-4  Added..................................................8319
201-8.102  Revised..................................................8319
    Corrected......................................................10392
201-8.102-1  Revised................................................8319
201-8.102-2  Revised................................................8319
201-8.103  Revised..................................................8319
201-8.104  (a) revised..............................................8319
201-8.105-1  Revised................................................8320
201-8.105-2  Revised................................................8320
201-8.105-4  Removed................................................8320
201-8.105-7  Removed................................................8320
201-8.105-12  Revised...............................................8320
201-8.105-13  Removed...............................................8320
201-8.105-14  Removed...............................................8320
201-8.105-18  (b) revised...........................................8320
201-8.105-30  Revised...............................................8320
201-8.105-31  Heading revised.......................................8320
201-8.105-32  Heading revised.......................................8320
201-8.105-33  (b) revised...........................................8321
201-8.105-35  Added.................................................8321
201-8.105-36  Added.................................................8321
201-8.105-37  Added.................................................8321
201-8.106-6  Text removed; Note added...............................8321
201-8.107-1  Heading revised........................................8321
201-8.107-2  Heading revised........................................8321
201-8.107-3  Heading revised........................................8321
201-8.109  (c) revised..............................................8321
201-8.110-1  (b) revised............................................8322
201-8.112-8  Added..................................................8322
201-8.112-12  Revised...............................................8322
    (b) corrected..................................................10392
201-8.112-14  Revised...............................................8322
201-8.112-16  Revised...............................................8323
201-8.112-17  Removed...............................................8323
201-8.112-18  Removed...............................................8323
201-8.112-25  Added.................................................8323
201-8.112-26  Added.................................................8323
201-8.112-27  Added.................................................8323
201-8.113-2  Revised................................................8323
201-8.113-3  Revised................................................8324
201-8.113-4  Revised................................................8324
201-11.002-2  Added.................................................9958
201-23.104-1  (c)(2) revised........................................9958
201-24.202  See Temp. Reg. 13......................................45888
201-24.206  Revised.................................................9958
201-30.009  (a) introductory text revised; (b) added; (c) removed 
                                                                    9958
201-30.009-2  Revised...............................................9959
201-32.203  (h) and (i) redesignated as (i) and (j) and revised; 
        new (h) added...............................................9959
201-32.206  (a)(2) revised..........................................9959
201-33.003  Revised.................................................9959

[[Page 274]]

201-33.011  (a), (c), and (d)(6) revised............................9960
201-33.012  Added...................................................9960
Chapter 201 (Appendix A)  Temporary Reg. 13 added..................45887

                                  1987

41 CFR
                                                                   52 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter 201
201-8  Authority citation revised...........................10088, 28557
201-8.101-1  Revised...............................................10088
201-8.103-5  Added.................................................10088
201-8.104  (c) added...............................................10088
201-8.105-6  (b) revised...........................................28557
201-8.105-15  Removed..............................................10088
201-8.105-24  Removed..............................................10088
201-8.105-37  Revised..............................................10088
    (d) revised....................................................28557
201-8.105-38  Added................................................10088
201-8.105-39  Added................................................10088
201-8.105-40  Added................................................10089
201-8.105-41  Added................................................10089
201-8.105-42  Added................................................10089
201-8.105-43  Added................................................28557
201-8.106-6  Added.................................................28558
201-8.106-7  Added.................................................28558
201-8.107  Revised.................................................10089
201-8.107-1  Revised...............................................10089
201-8.107-2  Revised...............................................10090
201-8.107-3  Revised...............................................10090
201-8.107-4  Added.................................................10090
201-8.107-5  Added.................................................10090
201-8.107-6  Added.................................................28558
    Corrected......................................................30280
201-8.108  Revised.................................................10090
201-8.108-1  Added.................................................10090
201-8.109  Revised.................................................10090
201-8.110-1  (b) revised...........................................10091
201-8.111  Revised.................................................10092
201-8.111-1  Added.................................................10092
201-8.111-2  Added.................................................10092
201-8.111-3  Added.................................................10092
201-8.111-4  Added.................................................10093
201-8.112-4  Revised...............................................28558
201-8.112-17  Added................................................10093
201-11  Authority citation revised.................................10093
201-11.002-1  (b) introductory text revised........................10093
201-24  Correctly designated.........................................656
201-24.202  Correctly designated.....................................656
201-30  Authority citation revised.................................10093
201-30.018-3  Removed..............................................10093
201-30.019  Added..................................................10093
201-32  Authority citation revised.................................10379
201-32.400--201-32.404 (Subpart 201-32.4)  Added...................10379
201-32.402-5  (a) corrected........................................13173
201-32.403-3  (a)(1) corrected.....................................13173
201-34  Authority citation revised.................................10094
201-34.003  Added..................................................10094
201-38  Authority citation revised.................................42294
201-38.007  Revised................................................42294
201-38.007-1--201-38.007-4  Added..................................42294
201-38.007-5  Added................................................42295
201-38.007-6  Added................................................42295
201-38.007-7  Added................................................42295
Chapter 201 (Appendix A)  
    Temporary Reg. 13 corrected......................................656
    Temporary Reg. 10, Supp. 1 added................................5113
    Temporary Reg. 13, Supp. 1 added...............................46469

                                  1988

41 CFR
                                                                   53 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter 201
201-1  Authority citation revised..................................24722
201-1.101-1  (b) through (e) removed; (a) designation removed; 
        eff. 8-29-88...............................................24722
201-1.101-2  (b) and (c) revised; eff. 8-29-88.....................24722
201-1.102  (c)(6) added............................................40067
201-1.102-1  Removed; eff. 8-29-88.................................24722
201-1.102-2  (d) amended; nomenclature change; eff. 8-29-88........24722
201-1.103  (d) amended; eff. 8-29-88...............................24722
    (c) (3) and (4) removed; (c)(5) redesignated as (c)(3).........28639
201-1.201  (a) amended; nomenclature change; eff. 8-29-88..........24722
201-1.402  Nomenclature change; eff. 8-29-88.......................24722

[[Page 275]]

201-1.403  (a) and (c) amended; eff. 8-29-88.......................24722
    (d) added......................................................40067
201-1.502  (b)(2) amended; eff. 8-29-88............................24722
201-2  Authority citation revised..................................24722
201-2.001  Amended; eff. 8-29-88...................................24722
201-6  Authority citation revised..................................24723
201-6.000  Amended; eff. 8-29-88...................................24723
201-6.102  (c) removed; eff. 8-29-88...............................24723
201-6.103-1  (a) amended; eff. 8-29-88.............................24723
201-11.001  (b) revised............................................29052
201-11.003  Revised................................................29052
201-20  Text removed; eff. 8-29-88.................................24723
201-21  Authority citation revised.................................24723
201-21.002--201-21.007  Removed; eff. 8-29-88......................24723
201-21.012--201-21.014  Removed; eff. 8-29-88......................24723
201-21.016  Removed; eff. 8-29-88..................................24723
201-21.017  Removed; eff. 8-29-88..................................24723
201-22  Authority citation revised.................................24723
201-22.001-3  Removed; eff. 8-29-88................................24723
201-22.001-4  Removed; eff. 8-29-88................................24723
201-22.003-3  (b) and (c) amended; eff. 8-29-88....................24723
201-24  Authority citation revised.................................24723
201-24.105  Removed; eff. 8-29-88..................................24723
201-24.301  Removed; eff. 8-29-88..................................24723
201-26  Authority citation revised.................................24723
201-26.204  (a)(3) revised; eff. 8-29-88...........................24723
201.26-206  (a) removed; (b) through (e) redesignated as (a) 
        through (d); new (a) revised; eff. 8-29-88.................24723
201-30  Authority citation revised.................................24723
201-30.001--201-30.006  Removed; eff. 8-29-88......................24723
201-30.007  (a) amended; eff. 8-29-88..............................24723
    (d) removed; (c) revised.......................................29052
201-30.007-2  Added................................................40067
201-30.008  (a) introductory text and (1) and (d) revised..........29052
201-30.009  (a)(2) amended; eff. 8-29-88...........................24723
    Revised........................................................29052
201-30.009-3  (a), (d), and (e) removed; (b) and (c) redesignated 
        as (a) and (b); eff. 8-29-88...............................24723
201-30.010  Removed; eff. 8-29-88..................................24723
201-30.011  Removed; eff. 8-29-88..................................24723
201-30.013  Revised................................................29053
201-30.013-3  (a)(1), (b)(1), and (c) removed; (a)(2) and (b)(2) 
        redesignated as (a) and (b); eff. 8-29-88..................24723
201-30.014--201-30.019  Removed; eff. 8-29-88......................24724
201-31  Authority citation revised.................................24724
201-31.001  Amended; eff. 8-29-88..................................24724
    Revised........................................................29053
201-31.002  Removed; eff. 8-29-88..................................24724
201-31.003  (a), (b), (c), and (f) amended; eff. 8-29-88...........24724
201-31.004  (b) and (d) removed; (c) and (e) redesignated as (b) 
        and (c); new (c) amended; eff. 8-29-88.....................24724
201-31.005  (a) amended; eff. 8-29-88..............................24724
201-31.006  (a), (b), and (c) amended; eff. 8-29-88................24724
    Heading revised; (b) removed; (c) redesignated as (b)..........29053
201-31.010--201-31.010-4  Removed; eff. 8-29-88....................24724
201-32  Authority citation revised.................................24724
201-32.101  Removed; eff. 8-29-88..................................24724
201-32.102  (b) and (c) amended; eff. 8-29-88......................24724
201-32.103  Removed................................................29053
201-32.104  (a) amended; eff. 8-29-88..............................24724

[[Page 276]]

201-32.105  Removed; eff. 8-29-88..................................24724
201-32.106  (a) removed; (b), (c), and (d) redesignated as (a), 
        (b), and (c); new (b) and (c) amended......................29053
201-32.202  Added..................................................40067
201-32.206  (a)(2) amended; eff. 8-29-88...........................24724
    (g)(2)(iii) introductory text amended; (g)(2)(iii) (A) through 
(C) removed........................................................29053
201-32.207  Removed; eff. 8-29-88..................................24724
201-32.208  Removed; eff. 8-29-88..................................24724
201-32.302  (a) removed; (b) and (c) redesignated as (a) and (b); 
        new (a) amended; eff. 8-29-88..............................24724
201-32.303  (e)(1) amended; eff. 8-29-88...........................24724
201-34  Removed; eff. 8-29-88......................................24724
201-39  Authority citation revised.................................24724
201-39.002-7  Amended; eff. 8-29-88................................24724
201-39.006-6  (d) amended; eff. 8-29-88............................24724
201-41  Authority citation revised.................................28639
201-41.005  Added..................................................28639
201-45  Authority citation revised.................................24724
201-45.101-1  (b)(2) amended; eff. 8-29-88.........................24724
201-45.104-2  Removed; eff. 8-29-88................................24725
201-45.104-5  Removed; eff. 8-29-88................................24725
201-45.106-4  Removed; eff. 8-29-88................................24725
201-45.109-3  Removed; eff. 8-29-88................................24725
201-45.500--201-45.514 (Subpart 201-45.5)  Nomenclature change; 
        eff. 8-29-88...............................................24725
201-45.503  Removed; eff. 8-29-88..................................24725
201-45.504-2  Introductory text removed; eff. 8-29-88..............24725
201-45.505-1  Amended; eff. 8-29-88................................24725
201-45.506  Amended; eff. 8-29-88..................................24725
201-45.511  Removed; eff. 8-29-88..................................24725
201-45.600--201-45.611 (Subpart 201-45.6)  Nomenclature change; 
        eff. 8-29-88...............................................24725
201-45.609-2  Amended; eff. 8-29-88................................24725
201-45.800--201-45.804  (Subpart 201-45.8  Removed; eff. 8-29-88 
                                                                   24725
Chapter 201 (Appendix A)  
    Temporary Reg. 13, Supp. 1 added...............................46469
    Temporary Reg. 13, Supp. 2 added...............................47199
    Temporary Reg. 10, Supp. 2 added...............................52424

                                  1989

41 CFR
                                                                   54 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter 201
201-1.102  (c)(7) added; interim...................................42303
201-2.001  Amended.................................................37464
    Amended; interim...............................................42303
201-6.203  (g) added; interim......................................42303
201-8  Removed.....................................................37464
201-13  Added......................................................37464
201-19  Added......................................................35496
201-33  Authority citation revised; nomenclature change.............2126
201-33.000-1  Added.................................................2126
201-33.001  Redesignated as 201-33.001-1 and revised; new 201-
        33.001 added................................................2126
201-33.001-1  Redesignated from 201-33.001 and revised..............2126
201-33.002  (b) revised.............................................2127
201-33.003  Revised.................................................2127
201-33.003-2  (a)(3) and (c) removed; (d) and (e) redesignated as 
        (c) and (d); (b) revised....................................2127
201-33.004  Revised.................................................2127
201-33.005  Removed.................................................2127
201-33.006  Introductory text revised...............................2127
201-33.008  Revised.................................................2127
201-33.009-5  (b) amended...........................................2127
201-33.011  Introductory text revised; (c) removed; (b) 
        redesignated as (c); new (b) added..........................2127

[[Page 277]]

201-33.012  (b)(1) amended; (b)(1) designation and (2) removed......2127
201-38.006  Amended................................................37465
201-38.009  Added; interim.........................................42303
201-38.200--201-38.207-3 (Subpart 201-38.2)  Redesignated from 
        Part 201-39................................................37465
201-39  Redesignated as 201-38.200--201-38.207-3 (Subpart 201-
        38.2); new Part 201-39 added...............................37465
201-40.005  Amended................................................37466
Subtitle F
Subtitle F  Subtitle established...................................20266
Chapter 301
301-1--301-14 (Chapter 301)  Chapter established...................20267
301-1  Added.......................................................20267
301-1.1  Revised; interim..........................................53321
301-1.3  (b) revised; interim......................................53321
301-1.6  (b) revised; (f) added....................................47523
301-2  Added.......................................................20270
301-3  Added.......................................................20272
301-3.3  (a) and (d) revised.......................................47523
301-3.6  Corrected.................................................23563
301-4  Added.......................................................20276
301-4.2  (a)(2), (d) (1), and (2) revised..........................37810
301-4.3  (a)(1) amended............................................47524
301-5  Added.......................................................20279
301-6  Added.......................................................20279
301-7  Added.......................................................20280
301-7.6  (c)(6) amended............................................47524
301-8  Added.......................................................20288
301-9  Added.......................................................20290
301-10  Added......................................................20291
301-11  Added......................................................20293
301-12  Added......................................................20295
301-14  Added......................................................20297
301  Appendix A added..............................................20299
Chapter 302
302-1--302-12 (Chapter 302)  Chapter established...................20306
302-1  Added.......................................................20306
302-1.1--302-1.14  Designated as Subpart A; interim................29716
302-1.100--302-1.107 (Subpart B)  Added; interim...................29716
302-2  Added.......................................................20314
302-3  Added.......................................................20316
302-4  Added.......................................................20317
302-5  Added.......................................................20318
302-6  Added.......................................................20321
302-6.1  Introductory text, (a) through (d), and (e)(1) revised; 
        (g) added..................................................37811
    (g) (2) and (5) corrected......................................43521
302-6.2  (g) introductory text republished; (g) (1) and (2) 
        revised....................................................51300
302-7  Added.......................................................20323
302-8  Added.......................................................20324
302-9  Added.......................................................20328
302-10  Added......................................................20330
302-11  Added......................................................20332
302-11.8  Corrected................................................23563
302-12  Added......................................................20350
302-12.4  (b)(3) revised...........................................37812
    (b)(3) corrected...............................................43521
Subtitle F (Appendix)  Temporary Reg. 3 amended....................48611
Chapter 303
303-1--303-2 (Chapter 303)  Chapter established....................20351
303-1  Added.......................................................20351
303-2  Added.......................................................20352
Chapter 304
304-1--304-2 (Chapter 304)  Chapter established....................20353
304-1  Added.......................................................20353
304-2  Added.......................................................20353
Subtitle F (Appendix)  Heading added...............................20353
    Temporary Reg. 1 added.........................................20355
    Temporary Reg. 2 added.........................................20357
    Temporary Reg. 2 corrected.....................................27795
    Temporary Reg. 3 added.........................................20360

                                  1990

41 CFR
                                                                   55 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter 201
Chapter 201  Revised...............................................53387
201-1  Authority citation revised..................................30704
201-1.000-1  (c) revised...........................................30704
    (c) regulation at 55 FR 30704 effective date delayed to 10-1-
90.................................................................34719
201-1.102-2  (c) revised...........................................30704
    (c) regulation at 55 FR 30704 effective date delayed to 10-1-
90.................................................................34719
201-1.102-3  Removed...............................................30705

[[Page 278]]

    Regulation at 55 FR 30705 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
201-1.103  Revised.................................................30705
    Regulation at 55 FR 30705 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
    Regulation at 53 FR 28639 confirmed............................35315
201-2  Authority citation revised..................................30705
201-2.001  Amended.................................................30705
    Regulation at 55 FR 30705 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
201-23  Revised....................................................30706
    Regulation at 55 FR 30706 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
201-23.103-1  (c)(4) corrected.....................................37478
201-24  Authority citation revised.................................30709
201-24.109  Added..................................................30710
    Regulation at 55 FR 30710 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
201-24.202  Revised................................................30710
    Regulation at 55 FR 30710 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
201-24.203  Removed................................................30710
    Regulation at 55 FR 30710 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
201-38  Authority citation revised.................................30710
201-38.200--201-38.207-3 (Subpart 201-38.2)  Removed...............30710
    Regulation at 55 FR 30710 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
201-39.100--201-39.199 (Subpart 201-39.1)  Heading added...........30710
    Regulation at 55 FR 30710 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
201-39.100  Added..................................................30710
    Regulation at 55 FR 30710 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
    (c)(2) corrected...............................................37478
201-39.5202-2  Added...............................................30710
    Regulation at 55 FR 30710 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
201-39.5202-3  Added...............................................30710
    Regulation at 55 FR 30710 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
201-41  Authority citation revised.................................30710
201-41.005  Regulation at 53 FR 28639 confirmed; revised...........35315
201-41.006  Revised................................................30710
    Regulation at 55 FR 30710 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
201-45.200--201-45.209  (Subpart 201-45.2) Added...................19221
  (Appendix A) Temporary Reg. 13, Supplement 3 added..................30
Chapter 201  Appendix A amended....................................30711
    Regulation at 55 FR 30711 effective date delayed to 10-1-90....34719
Chapter 301
301-1.1  Revised...................................................49894
301-1.6  (e) amended...............................................41525
301-2.2  (d)(1)(ii) revised........................................10769
301-3.2  (c)(1) amended............................................41525
301-3.4  (b)(1)(ii) and (c) revised................................10770
301-3.6  (b)(1)(iii) amended.......................................41526
301-7  Revised.....................................................41526
301-8.1  Introductory text revised.................................41533
    Introductory text corrected....................................46064
301-8.2  (a) introductory text amended; (b) revised................41533
301-8.3  Introductory text, (a)(1) and (b)(1) introductory text 
        revised; (d) added..........................................2380
      Revised......................................................41533
301-8.5  (a)(2) and (3) amended....................................41534
301-8.6  (b) revised...............................................31534
301-8.7  Revised...................................................41534
301-9.1  (c) revised...............................................49894
301-10.1  Heading and section revised..............................10770
    (a) amended....................................................49894
301-10.2  (b)(2)(ii) revised.......................................10770
    (b)(2)(ii) amended.............................................49895
301-10.3  Revised..................................................10770
    (a) amended; (d) removed; (e) redesignated as (d); (c)(4) and 
new (d) introductory text revised..................................49895

[[Page 279]]

301-11.6  (a)(1), (4), (b)(15), (26), and (27) amended; (b)(16) 
        revised....................................................41534
    (b)(21) revised................................................49895
301-12.1  Amended..................................................41534
301-12.5  (a) amended..............................................41534
301-14.6  (a) amended..............................................41534
301-14.7  (b)(1), (2) and (d)(2)(i) amended........................41534
301-15  Added......................................................10771
301-15.40--301-15.48 (Subpart C)  Heading revised..................49895
301-15.40  Introductory text, (b) and (c) revised; (d) added.......49895
301-15.41  Revised.................................................49895
301-15.42  Revised.................................................49895
301-15.43  (b) revised.............................................49896
301-15.44  (a), (c), (e)(1), (3) and (h) revised...................49896
301-15.45  (a) revised.............................................49896
301-15.47  Redesignated as 301-15.48; new 301-15.47 added..........49896
301-15.48  Redesignated from 301-15.47; (a)(2) and (d) revised.....49896
301-16  Added; eff. to 6-30-92......................................7327
Chapter 301  Appendix A revised..............................1946, 51713
    Appendix A corrected.....................................5945, 10866
    Appendix A amended.............................................41534
    Appendix B added...............................................41535
Chapter 302
302-1.3  (a)(3) revised............................................10778
302-1.11  (b)(2) and (e) revised...................................10778
    (b)(2) corrected...............................................14916
302-1.12  (b)(1), (c)(1), (e)(1), (5) and (6) amended..............41536
302-1.13  (b)(3) amended...........................................41536
302-2.1  Revised...................................................41537
302-2.2  (a) and (b) introductory text revised.....................41537
302-5.2  (a)(1), (g)(1) and (2) revised; (i) amended...............41537
302-5.4  (c)(1)(i), (ii), (3) and (4) revised; (c)(2)(v) removed 
                                                                   41537
302-6.1  (a) amended...............................................41538
302-6.2  (g)(1) and (2) revised....................................45608
302-11  Appendixes A and B amended..................................1674
    Appendix B corrected.....................................5945, 10866
    Appendix C amended..............................................1676
Subtitle F (Appendix)  Temporary Reg. 1 effective date extended to 
        6-30-90.....................................................3740
    Appendix removed...............................................10778

                                  1991

41 CFR
                                                                   56 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter 201
201-4.001  Corrected................................................4948
201-9.200  Introductory text corrected..............................4948
201-18.002  (c) corrected...........................................4948
201-20.103-7  (c) corrected.........................................4948
201-20.203-1  (a)(3) corrected......................................4948
201-20.305-1  (a)(1) introductory text corrected....................4948
201-21.603  (d)(4)(iii) and (e) introductory text corrected........29186
201-22.100  Corrected..............................................29187
201-23.003  (d) corrected...........................................4948
201-24.107  Heading and (a) corrected...............................4948
201-39.106-4  (c)(2) corrected......................................4948
201-39.1501-1  (a)(1) corrected.....................................4948
201-39.1701-1  (c) corrected........................................4948
201-39.1701-3  Introductory text and (c) corrected..................4948
201-39.5202-1  Corrected............................................4948
201-39.5202-2  Corrected............................................4948
201-39.5202-3  Corrected............................................4948
201-39.5202-4  Corrected............................................4948
201-39.5202-5  Corrected............................................4948
201-39.5202-6  Corrected............................................4948
Chapter 201  FIRMR Index  Corrected.................................4949
Chapter 301
301-1.1--301-1.3  Designated as Subpart A..........................23654
301-1  Authority citation revised...................................9878
301-1.1  Revised.............................................9878, 23654
    Regulation at 56 FR 9878 effective date corrected..............11106
301-1.2  (b) revised; (c) added; interim............................9878
    Regulation at 56 FR 9878 effective date corrected..............11106
    Corrected......................................................11304
    (d) added......................................................23654
301-1.3  (b) revised; interim.......................................9878
    Regulation at 56 FR 9878 effective date corrected..............11106
    (c)(3) through (9) redesignated as (c)(4) through (10); new 
(c)(3) added.......................................................23654
301-1.4  Redesignated as 301-1.101.................................23654
301-1.5  Redesignated as 301-1.102.................................23654
301-1.6  Redesignated as 301-1.103.................................23654

[[Page 280]]

301-1.100--301-1.103  Designated as Subpart B......................23654
301-1.100  Added...................................................23654
301-1.101  Redesignated from 301-1.4; (b)(3) amended...............23654
301-1.102  Redesignated from 301-1.5...............................23654
301-1.103  Redesignated from 301-1.6...............................23654
301.1.200--301-1.205 (Subpart C)  Added............................23654
301-3.5  (a)(2) and (b) amended....................................23655
301-4.2  (a)(2), (d)(1) and (2) revised............................28824
301-7.1  (b)(2) and (6) amended....................................23655
301-7.5  (a) amended...............................................23655
301-8.3  (c) revised; effective to 10-1-94.........................37478
301-10.2  (a)(3) and (b)(3) amended................................23655
    (b)(3) corrected...............................................29439
301-10.3  (b)(2) revised...........................................10378
301-11.5  (g) amended..............................................23656
301-11.6  (b)(1) amended...........................................23656
301-12  Heading corrected..........................................28589
301-12.4  (d) amended..............................................23656
301-14.4  Amended..................................................23656
Chapter 301  Appendix A corrected...................................1492
Chapter 302
302-1.1--302-1.14 (Subpart A)  Regulations at 54 FR 29716 
        confirmed..................................................15050
302-1.2  (a)(7) removed; (a)(4) and (5) revised....................23656
302-1.3  (a)(2) revised; (a)(3) removed; (a)(4) and (5) 
        redesignated as (a)(3) and (4); (c) and (d) amended........23656
    (c) corrected...........................................28589, 40946
302-1.4  (c) revised; (d) through (k) redesignated as (e) through 
        (l); new (d) added.........................................23656
    (i) revised....................................................46989
302-1.5  (b)(3) amended............................................15050
    (a) revised....................................................23656
302-1.7  (b) amended...............................................23657
302-1.8  Revised...................................................46989
302-1.10  Revised..................................................23657
302-1.11  (c) amended..............................................15050
    Removed........................................................23657
302-1.12  (f) and (g) amended......................................23657
302-1.13  (c)(2)(iii)  amended.....................................15050
302-1.100--302-1.107 (Subpart B)  Regulations at 54 FR 29716 
        confirmed..................................................15050
302-1.100  (a) and (b) amended.....................................15050
302-1.101  Revised.................................................15050
    (b)(3) and (d) corrected.......................................28796
302-1.102  Revised.................................................15050
302-1.103  Revised.................................................15050
    Introductory text corrected....................................28796
302-1.104  Revised.................................................15050
302-1.105  (a) and (c) revised.....................................15050
    (a) corrected..................................................28796
302-1.107  Revised.................................................15051
302-2.1  Amended...................................................23657
302-2.2  (c)(1) amended............................................23657
302-2.3  (a) amended...............................................23657
302-3.1  (b) introductory text revised; (b)(2) removed; (b)(3) 
        through (6) redesignated as (b)(2) through (5).............46989
302-3.2  (b) amended...............................................23657
302-4.1  (c)(3) revised............................................57289
302-4.3  (b) amended...............................................23657
302-5.2  (a) amended...............................................23658
302-6.1  (b) amended...............................................23658
    (b) corrected..................................................29439
302-6.2  (g)(1) and (2) revised....................................51177
302-7.1  (a) and (b) revised.......................................46989
302-7.3  Revised...................................................46990
302-7.5  Revised...................................................46990
302-11  Authority citation corrected...............................12816
302-11.2  (a) amended; (b)(1) revised..............................23658
302-11.4  (g) added................................................23658
302-11.5  (i) and (k) revised; (o) and (p) added....................9290
302-11.7  (e)(2) amended............................................9290
302-11.8  (b)(1)(iii), (c)(3), (e)(1), (2)(iii), (4)(i)(A) through 
        (C), (f)(1) and (2) revised; (c)(6) and (h) removed; 
        (f)(3) through (5) redesignated as (f)(4) through (6); new 
        (f)(3) added................................................9290
    (e)(4)(i)(A) and (f)(1) corrected..............................12816
302-11.9  (b)(3) amended............................................9292
302-11  Appendixes A, B and C amended..............................10378
    Figure 302-11(a) and Figure 302-11(b) removed...................9292
302-12.1  Amended..................................................23658
302-12.4  (a)(2) amended...........................................23658
    (a)(2) correctly amended.......................................29439

[[Page 281]]

Chapter 303
303-1.1  Revised...................................................57289
303-1.2  Amended...................................................57290
303-1.3  Redesignated as 303-1.4...................................57289
    Added..........................................................57290
303-1.4  Redesignated as 303-1.7; new 303-1.4 redesignated from 
        303-1.3....................................................57289
303-1.5  Revised...................................................57290
303-1.7  Redesignated from 303-1.4.................................57289
303-2.1  Amended...................................................57290
303-2.3  Revised...................................................57290
303-2.6  (a)(1) revised; (b) removed; (c) redesignated as (b)......57290
303-2.8  Amended...................................................57290
Chapter 304
304-1--304-2 (Chapter 304)  Revised; interim........................9878
    Regulation at 56 FR 9878 effective date corrected..............11106
304-1.2  (b)(8) corrected..........................................11304
304-1.6  (a) and (b) corrected.....................................11304
304-1.7  (a) through (d) corrected.................................11304
    (b) and (d) corrected..........................................12422
304-1.8  (a) corrected.............................................11304

                                  1992

41 CFR
                                                                   57 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter 201
201-38  Reinstated; CFR correction.................................56280
    CFR correction withdrawn.......................................60132
Chapter 301
301-1  Authority citation revised..................................28633
301-1.1  Amended...................................................28633
301-1.2  (a), (b) and (c) amended..................................28633
    (c) revised; interim...........................................53289
301-1.3  (c)(1), (2) and (6) amended...............................28633
301-1.102  (b) introductory text and (3) amended...................28633
301-2  Authority citation revised..................................28633
301-2.2  (d)(4) amended............................................28633
301-2.3  (e) amended...............................................28633
301-2.6  (d) added; interim........................................54305
301-3  Authority citation revised..................................28633
301-3.3  (d)(2)(i) amended.........................................28633
301-3.4  (b)(1)(ii) amended........................................28633
301-3.5  (a) introductory text amended.............................28633
301-3.6  (b)(1) introductory text amended..........................28633
301-4  Authority citation revised..................................28633
301-4.2  (a) introductory text and (b) introductory text amended 
                                                                   28633
301-5  Authority citation revised..................................28633
301-5.1  (a) amended...............................................28633
301-6  Authority citation revised..................................28633
301-6.4  (c) amended...............................................28633
301-7  Authority citation revised..................................28633
301-7.1  Introductory text amended.................................28633
301-7.2  (b) introductory text amended.............................28633
301-7.4  Amended....................................................6678
301-8  Authority citation revised..................................28633
301-8.1  Introductory text, (a), (c) and (d) amended...............28633
301-8.2  (b) amended...............................................28633
301-8.3  (d) amended...............................................28633
301-8.4  (c) amended...............................................28633
301-8.5  (b) amended...............................................28633
301-9  Authority citation revised..................................28634
301-9.2  Redesignated as 301-9.3; new 301-9.2 added.................8091
301-9.3  Redesignated as 301-9.4; new 301-9.3 redesignated from 
        301-9.2.....................................................8091
301-9.4  Redesignated from 301-9.3..................................8091
    Amended........................................................28634
301-10  Authority citation revised.................................28634
301-10.1  (b)(3) amended...........................................28634
301-10.2  (b) introductory text and (2)(iii) amended...............28634
301-11  Authority citation revised.................................28634
301-11.3  (a) amended..............................................28634
301-11.4  (a) amended..............................................28634
301-11.6  (b)(23) through (27) redesignated as (b)(24) through 
        (28); (b)(19) and new (b)(24) amended; new (b)(23) addd.....8092
301-12  Authority citation revised.................................28634

[[Page 282]]

301-12.2  Amended..................................................28634
301-12.4  Introductory text and (c) amended........................28634
301-12.7  (a) and (c) amended......................................28634
301-14  Authority citation revised.................................28634
301-14.2  Amended..................................................28634
301-14.4  Amended..................................................28634
301-14.9  Amended..................................................28634
301-14.10  Amended.................................................28634
301-15  Authority citation revised.................................28634
301-15.43  (a) amended.............................................28634
301-16  Authority citation revised.................................28634
301-16.1  Amended..................................................28634
Chapter 301  Appendix A revised.....................................6678
    Appendix A amended.............................................28634
Chapter 302
302-1  Authority citation revised..................................28634
302-1.1  Amended...................................................28635
302-1.2  (b) introductory text amended.............................28635
302-1.3  (a) introductory text amended.............................28634
    (a) introductory text and (c) amended..........................28635
302-1.4  (d), (f)(1)(ii), (iii), (iv), (2) and (j)(1) introductory 
        text amended...............................................28634
    Introductory text, (b), (e) introductory text, (f)(2) and (k) 
amended............................................................28635
302-1.5  (b)(1) and (2) introductory text amended..................28635
302-1.6  Introductory text amended.................................28635
302-1.9  (b) amended...............................................28635
302-1.10  (g) amended..............................................28634
302-1.12  (e)(6) amended; (a), (b)(1), (2) introductory text, (3) 
        and (5) amended............................................28635
302-1.13  (a)(2) introductory text, (c)(1), (2)(ii), (d)(1)(i)(D) 
        and (2)(i) amended.........................................28635
302-1.14  (b) introductory text amended............................28635
302-1.105  (c) amended.............................................28635
302-2  Authority citation revised..................................28635
302-2.3  (c)(2), (e)(1), (2) and (3) amended.......................28635
302-3  Authority citation revised..................................28635
302-3.1  (c) introductory text, (2) and (4) amended................28635
302-3.2  (b) amended...............................................28635
302-3.3  (b) amended...............................................28635
302-3.4  Amended...................................................28635
302-4  Authority citation revised..................................28635
302-4.1  (b) introductory text amended.............................28635
302-4.3  (b) amended...............................................28635
302-4.4  Amended...................................................28635
302-5  Authority citation revised..................................28635
302-5.1  Amended...................................................28635
302-5.2  (e) and (i) amended.......................................28635
302-5.3  Amended...................................................28635
302-5.5  Amended...................................................28635
302-6  Authority citation revised..................................28635
302-6.1  Introductory text, (g)(1) introductory text, (ii), (2), 
        (4) and (5) amended........................................28635
302-6.2  (g)(1) and (2) amended....................................45001
302-6.3  (b) amended...............................................28635
302-6.4  Amended...................................................28635
302-6.5  Amended...................................................28635
302-7  Authority citation revised..................................28636
302-8  Auhtority citation revised..................................28636
302-8.1  Amended...................................................28636
302-8.2  (a), (b)(1), (e) and (f) amended..........................28636
302-8.3  (a)(3) amended............................................28636
302-8.4  (e)(3) amended............................................28636
302-9  Authority citation revised..................................28636
302-9.1  (a) and (d) amended.......................................28636
302-9.3  (b) amended...............................................28636
302-9.4  Amended...................................................28636
302-10  Authority citation revised.................................28636
302-10.1  (a)(1), (2) and (b) amended..............................28636
302-10.2  (a) amended..............................................28636
302-10.3  (b) introductory text, (2), (c)(1), (2) and (d)(2) 
        amended....................................................28636
302-10.4  (b) and (e) amended......................................28636
302-10.5  (a)(1) and (c) amended...................................28636
302-10.6  Amended..................................................28636
302-11  Authority citation revised.................................28636

[[Page 283]]

302-11.1  Amended..................................................28636
302-11.2  (b) amended..............................................28636
302-11.3  (i) amended..............................................28636
302-11.4  Introductory text amended................................28636
302-11.5  Introductory text and (e) amended........................28636
302-11.6  (a) and (e) amended......................................28636
302-11.8  (a), (d), (e)(1), (2)(i), (ii), (4) and (f)(3)(ii) 
        amended....................................................28636
302-11.9  (a) amended..............................................28636
302-11.12  Amended.................................................28636
302-11.13  Introductory text amended...............................28636
302-11  Appendixes A, B and C amended...............................1112
    Appendix B amended.............................................28636
302-12  Authority citation revised.................................28636
302-12.1  Amended..................................................28636
302-12.3  Amended..................................................28637
302-12.4  (b) introductory text and (1) amended....................28637
302-12.5  (b) amended..............................................28637
302-12.6  (a)(2) and (b)(2) amended................................28637
302-12.7  Amended..................................................28637
Chapter 303
303-1  Authority citation revised..................................28637
303-1.1  (a) amended...............................................28637
303-1.2  Amended...................................................28637
303-2  Authority citation revised..................................28637
303-2.6  (a)(3) amended............................................28637
303-2.7  Amended...................................................28637
Chapter 304
304-1  Authority citation revised..................................28637
    Revised; interim...............................................53289
304-2  Authority citation revised..................................28637
304-2.2  Amended...................................................28637
304-2.3  Amended...................................................28637
304-2.4  Introductory text and (e) amended.........................28637

                                  1993

41 CFR
                                                                   58 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter 301
301-1  Authority citation revised..................................58236
301-1.102  (a) introductory text and (b)(1) revised................58236
301-1.103  (f)(3) amended..........................................58236
301-2.5  (b) revised...............................................58236
301-3.3  Revised...................................................58236
    (d)(4)(iii)(C) and (ix) corrected..............................60390
301-4.3  (a)(1) and (2) revised....................................58240
301-7.11  (e) amended..............................................58241
301-7.12  (a)(2)(i) table amended..................................12890
301-8.2  (a) amended...............................................58241
301-8.3  (c)(2) and (d) amended....................................58241
301-10.2  (a)(2)(i) revised........................................58241
301-10.3  (f) redesignated as (e)..................................58241
301-11.6  (b)(9) revised...........................................58241
301-15.7  (g) amended..............................................58242
301-16  Added......................................................58242
301-16.4  (a)(1) corrected.........................................60390
301  Appendix A revised............................................12890
    amended........................................................58502
    revised........................................................67950
Chapter 302
302-1  Authority citation revised..................................58243
302-1.3  (a) revised...............................................58243
302-1.10  (b) through (g) redesignated as (c) through (h); (a), 
        new (e) introductory text and new (f) amended; new (b) 
        added......................................................58243
302-1.100--302-1.107 (Subpart B)  Heading revised..................58243
302-1.100  Revised.................................................58243
302-1.101  Introductory text and (a) revised.......................58243
302-1.102  Amended.................................................58244
302-1.104  Amended.................................................58244
302-1.105  (a) and (c) amended.....................................58244
302-1.106  Amended.................................................58244
302-6.2  (g)(1) and (2) amended....................................53137
302-11.1  Revised..................................................15437
302-11.5  (i) revised..............................................58244
    (j) revised....................................................15437
302-11.8  (e)(2) amended; (e)(2)(iv) revised; (e)(4) redesignated 
        as (e)(5); new (e)(4) and new (5)(iii) added...............15437
302-11  Appendixes A, B and C amended...............................8547
    Appendix D added...............................................15438
Chapter 304
304-1.3  (d) revised...............................................58244

[[Page 284]]

                                  1994

41 CFR
                                                                   59 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter 201
201-1.002-2  (d) and (e) redesignated as (e) and (f); new (d) and 
        (g) added; new (f) revised.................................66203
201-1.002-3  Added.................................................66203
201-3.001  (b)(1) revised..........................................66203
201-3.402  (b) amended.............................................61282
201-4.001  Amended.................................................61282
201-9.202-1  (b)(7) amended........................................61282
201-9.202-2  (b)(1)(ix) amended....................................61282
201-17.001  (l) and (m) revised; (n) added; interim..................953
201-18.003  Amended................................................61282
201-20.103-11  Added; interim........................................953
201-20.203-2  (c) revised..........................................66203
201-20.303  (d)(2) amended.........................................61282
201-20.305  (a)(3) revised; (a)(5) and (6) added; interim..........53361
    (a)(7) added...................................................61282
201-20.305-1  Introductory text and (c) removed; (a)(1) 
        introductory text, (3) and (b) revised; interim............53362
    (a)(1) introductory text revised; (c) added....................61282
201-21.403  (a)(2)(ii) amended.....................................61283
201-21.603  (d)(1) and (3) amended.................................61283
201-21.604  (a) amended............................................61283
201-23.003  (a) and (c) amended....................................61283
201-24.101-2  (a) introductory text revised........................61283
201-24.101-3  (a) amended; (d) revised; (g) added..................61283
201-24.102  (c)(2) amended.........................................61283
201-24.104  Removed................................................61283
201-39.001  (b) revised............................................61283
201-39.101-3  (b)(4) and (5) redesignated as (b)(5) and (6); new 
        (b)(4) and (7) added; new (b)(6) revised...................66203
201-39.101-6  (b) amended..........................................61283
201-39.104-1  (b)(3) amended.......................................61283
201-39.802  Revised................................................61283
201-39.802-1  Revised..............................................61283
201-39.802-2  Revised..............................................61283
201-39.802-3  Revised..............................................61284
201-39.1402-1  (b) revised.........................................66204
201-39.1501-1  (b) revised.........................................66204
201-39.3304-1  Revised.............................................61284
    Chapter 201 FIRMR Index amended................................61284
Chapter 301
301-1.3  (a) and (c)(1) revised....................................46192
301-1.101  (b)(4) added............................................46193
301-1.202  Heading revised; (a)(5) and (b)(6) added................46193
301-1.205  (e) added...............................................46193
301-3.3  (e)(1)(vi) amended........................................27488
301-4.2  (a) revised; (b) removed; (c) and (d) redesignated as (b) 
        and (c); new (c) amended...................................66626
301-4.4  Amended...................................................66626
301-7.2  (a)(4) added; (b) revised.................................46193
301-8.3  (c) revised...............................................43500
301-8.5  (a)(4) added..............................................46194
301-9.2  (a)(1) revised............................................27488
301-11.2  Revised..................................................46194
301-16.2  (g) removed..............................................46194
301-16.3  Revised..................................................46194
301-16.4  (c)(1) revised...........................................46195
301-17  Added......................................................46195
301  Appendix A amended............................................15119
      Appendix A revised...........................................65682
Chapter 302
302-1  Authority citation revised..................................58243
302-1.2  (a)(7) added..............................................27488
302-1.10  (b)(1) amended...........................................27488
302-2.3  (c) introductory text amended.............................66626
302-6.1  (c) and (f) revised.......................................27489
302-6.2  (g)(1) and (2) amended....................................46357
302-11.8  (e)(2)(iii) amended......................................27490
302-11  Appendixes A through D amended.............................10997
    Appendix A corrected...........................................22520

                                  1995

41 CFR
                                                                   60 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter 201
201-3.402  (b) corrected......................................2029, 7715
201-9.202-1  (b)(7) corrected.................................2029, 7715
    Revised........................................................55661
201-9.202-2  (b)(1)(ix) corrected.............................2029, 7715
201-18.003  Corrected.........................................2029, 7715
201-20.303  (d)(2) corrected..................................2029, 7716
201-20.305  (a)(7) corrected..................................2030, 7716
201-21.403  (a)(2)(ii) corrected....................................2030
    (a)(2)(ii) corrected............................................7716
201-21.603  (d)(1) and (3) corrected..........................2030, 7716
201-21.604  (a) corrected.....................................2030, 7716

[[Page 285]]

201-23.003  (a) and (c) corrected.............................2030, 7716
201-39.5  Removed..................................................10509
201-39.001  (b) corrected.....................................2030, 7716
201-39.101-6  (b) corrected...................................2030, 7716
201-39.104-1  (b)(3) corrected......................................7716
    (b)(3) corrected................................................2030
201-39.601-2  Removed..............................................10509
201-39.803-3  Revised..............................................10509
201-39.1700  Revised...............................................56249
201-39.1702  Added.................................................56249
201-39.1702-1  Added...............................................56249
201-39.1702-2  Added...............................................56249
201-39.3304-1  Corrected......................................2030, 7716
    FIRMR Index amended............................................10510
Chapter 301
301-11.3  (c) amended..............................................62333
301-17  appendix A corrected........................................4477
Chapter 302
302-6.2  (g)(1) and (2) amended....................................49348
302-11  Appendixes A through D amended..............................2536

                                  1996

41 CFR
                                                                   61 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter 201
Chapter 201  Removed...............................................39359
201-1.003  (a) amended; (d) removed...................................13
201-2.001  Revised....................................................13
201-2.002  (a), (b) and (c) redesignated as (c), (a) and (b)..........13
201-2.003  (a) amended................................................13
201-3  Heading revised................................................13
201-3.000  Revised....................................................13
201-3.001  Revised....................................................13
201-3.101  Amended....................................................13
201-3.201  (d) revised................................................13
201-3.203  (c) revised................................................13
201-3.204  (a) amended................................................14
201-3.300--201-3.302 (Subpart 201-3.3)  Removed.......................14
201-4  Heading revised................................................14
201-4.000  Revised....................................................14
201-4.001  Amended....................................................14
201-4.002  Amended....................................................14
201-4.003  Added......................................................14
201-6.001  (a)(3) and (5) revised; (a)(6) added.......................14
201-6.002  (g) through (m) redesignated as (h) through (n); new 
        (g) added.....................................................14
201-7.001  (b) amended................................................14
201-7.002  (c) revised................................................15
201-17.001  (j) revised...............................................15
201-18.001  (e) revised...............................................15
201-18.002  (c) revised...............................................15
201-20.001  (d) removed...............................................15
201-20.102  Revised...................................................15
201-20.103  Revised...................................................15
201-20.103-7  (a) revised.............................................15
201-20.202  Revised...................................................15
201-20.203-2  Revised.................................................15
201-20.303  (d)(2) revised............................................15
201-20.304  (a) revised; (b)(1) removed; (b)(2) redesignated as 
        (b)(1); new (b)(2) added......................................15
201-20.305  (b)(5) added..............................................16
    (a)(3) and (5) revised..........................................2724
201-20.305-1  (a)(1) introductory text and (3) introductory text 
        revised.....................................................2724
201-20.305-3  Revised.................................................16
201-21.201  (b) amended...............................................16
201-21.301  (a) amended...............................................16
201-21.303  (d) amended...............................................16
201-21.401  (c) revised...............................................16
201-21.403  (a)(2)(ii) amended........................................16
201-21.601  (c)(3) introductory text amended..........................16
201-21.603  (d)(1) and (2) revised; (d)(3) and (6) removed; (d)(4) 
        and (5) redesignated as (d)(3) and (4)........................16
201-21.604  Removed...................................................16
201-22.303  Revised...................................................16
201-23  Revised....................................................39082
    Regulation at 61 FR 39082 eff. date corrected to 7-26-96.......40708
201-24.001  (g) removed...............................................16
201-24.102  (c)(2) revised..........................................2724
201-24.202  Removed................................................39083
    Regulation at 61 FR 39082 eff. date corrected to 7-26-96.......40708
201-39.001  Revised...................................................16
201-39.100--201-39.106-4 (Subpart 201-39.1)  Heading amended..........16
201-39.201  Amended...................................................17
201-39.801-1  Revised; interim.....................................35685
201-39.803  Removed; interim.......................................35685
201-39.803-1  Removed; interim.............................
</pre></body></html>
